G_ollum, originally named S_méagol (or T_rahald), was a S_toor, one of the three early H_obbit-types in the T_hird Age. His given name of S_méagol should be pronounced as s_may-ah-gol.

By possessing the O_ne R_ing, his life extended centuries beyond his nature, and he became deformed and twisted in body and mind by the corruption of the R_ing. He pursued the R_ing for many years after B_ilbo B_aggins found it in G_ollum's cave, within the M_isty Mountains, and took it away. Inadvertently, G_ollum would play a vital role in the ultimate Quest of M_ount Doom. The name G_ollum was derived from the sound of his gurgling, choking cough.

Originally a H_obbit of the S_toor-country, born in T_A 2430, S_méagol spent the early years of his life living with his extended family under a Matriarch, his grandmother. Around the year 2463, S_méagol became the fourth Bearer of the O_ne R_ing, after S_auron, I_sildur, and D_éagol. D_éagol was his cousin, and on S_méagol's birthday, they went fishing in the G_ladden Fields. It was there that D_éagol found a gold R_ing in the water, after being pulled out of their boat by a large fish. Almost immediately, S_méagol fell to the power of the R_ing, demanding it as a birthday present. When D_éagol refused, S_méagol promptly flew into a rage and fought with D_éagol over the R_ing, choking him to death and taking the R_ing as his own. S_méagol was quickly corrupted further by the R_ing and banished by his people; turned by his grandmother out of her hole, he was forced to find a home in a cave in the M_isty Mountains in around T_A 2470. The R_ing's malignant influence twisted his H_obbit body, as well as his mind, and prolonged his life far beyond its natural limits. He called it his "P_recious" or his "birthday-present", the latter as a replacement in his mind for killing D_éagol, although he would spend the rest of his life being haunted over murdering D_éagol.[1]

Life under the M_isty Mountains

He lived in the M_isty Mountains for over four hundred years, living on raw blind fish (which he caught from his small boat), bats, and occasionally, stray Orcs. G_ollum even made a song about raw fish, which is "The rocks and stones! They're like old bones all bare of meat!" that he used as a riddle to B_ilbo, and would much later sing to F_rodo B_aggins in a longer version. He found H_obbit and Elven food repulsive.

D_uring his centuries under the R_ing's influence, he developed a sort of dissociative identity disorder: S_méagol, his "good" personality, still vaguely remembered things like friendship and love, while G_ollum, his "bad" and prevailing personality, was a slave to the R_ing and would kill anyone who tried to take it. Years later, S_amwise G_amgee would name the good personality "Slinker" (for his fawning, eager-to-please demeanor), and the bad personality "Stinker". The two personalities often quarreled when he talked to himself (as J.R.R. T_olkien put it, "through not having anyone else to speak to") and had a love/hate relationship, mirroR_ing G_ollum's love and hatred for the R_ing and for himself.

G_ollum living in the M_isty Mountains

In July, T_A 2941, d_uring the Quest of E_rebor, the H_obbit B_ilbo B_aggins stumbled upon the dark lake on which he lived and found G_ollum's R_ing. G_ollum had lost the R_ing while squabbling with an imp goblin in the network of caves leading to the lake, though in fact it is more proper to say that the R_ing abandoned G_ollum, for it was known to have a will of its own. As G_andalf says later, it looks after itself, trying to get back to S_auron. After the infamous r_iddle-game, d_uring which G_ollum was unaware of his loss, G_ollum refused to show B_ilbo the promised way out and plotted to murder him. When he went to get his "birthday present," however, he found that it was gone. He suddenly realized the true answer to B_ilbo's last riddle—"W_hat have I got in my pocket?" -, breaking into a rage and then begun to chase him in the tunnels. B_ilbo inadvertently stumbled across the R_ing's power of invisibility as he ran, allowing him to follow G_ollum to the back entrance of the cave. There, B_ilbo at first thought to kill G_ollum, but was overcome with pity, so he jumped over him to escape. As B_ilbo ran, G_ollum cried out, "Thief! Thief, B_aggins! Curse it and crush it! We hates it forever!"; he did not immediately follow B_ilbo out of fear of being caught by the goblins, and so lingered in his cave.[2]

Search for the R_ing
G_ollum eventually left the Mountains and pursued B_ilbo a few years later, but the trail was cold. He made his way south to M_ordor where all evil was being drawn at the time, discovering the secret Stairs of C_irith Ungol located near M_inas M_orgul and surviving an encounter with S_helob. He was captured on his return, taken to the dungeons of B_arad-dûr and forced to reveal to S_auron under intense torture what he knew about the R_ing. G_ollum was then freed, as S_auron had learned all he needed from him and sensed he might draw out the R_ing. He was then subsequently caught by A_ragorn, then interrogated by G_andalf, who placed him in the care of the S_ilvan Elves living in T_hranduil's kingdom in M_irkwood. Assisted by Orcs, he escaped them, and set off looking for the S_hire. He passed through M_oria, but could not make it out of the Doors of D_urin. Seemingly, he then just waited there until he got lucky when the Fellowship of the R_ing passed through. However, as F_rodo was a R_ing-bearer, he might have foreseen the passing of the R_ing. Alternatively, some of Saruman's or S_auron's spies may have revealed to him the Fellowship was heading towards M_oria.[3]

The War of the R_ing
G_ollum met and started following the Fellowship of the R_ing in M_oria and was spotted and heard by F_rodo on several occasions. On January 15, 3019, the Fellowship was divided when G_andalf disappeared while fighting a B_alrog (though he later returned). G_ollum continued trailing the remaining members. It is unknown how he crossed the broken Bridge of K_hazad-dûm, but he came with them to L_órien without their knowing. G_ollum followed their boats down A_nduin (floating on a log) to N_en Hithoel and pursued F_rodo and S_am across the E_myn Muil when they struck out on their own towards M_ordor. G_ollum followed them, but after a confrontation (in which he bit and nearly strangled S_am for the R_ing), F_rodo subdued him and threatened to kill him with S_ting, the Elvish blade that G_ollum had apparently recognized by its former owner - B_ilbo. S_am tied an elven-rope around G_ollum's neck for a leash, which inflicted great pain on G_ollum. Taking pity, F_rodo made G_ollum swear to help them. Agreeing to the oath, G_ollum swore by the "P_recious" itself as the R_ing was treacherous and would hold G_ollum to his word, so F_rodo released him to show them the way to M_ordor. The unlikely company, guided by G_ollum, made its way to the B_lack Gate of M_ordor.

Along the way, it was revealed that G_ollum, having lived in a cave for hundreds of years, feared both the Sun and the Moon, calling them the 'Yellow Face' and the 'White Face' respectively.

F_rodo's kindness brought out the "S_méagol" personality, and he made at least some effort to keep his promise. The two had a strange sort of bond from both having been R_ing-bearers; in G_ollum, F_rodo saw his possible future, and so wanted to save him so he could save himself. Apart from G_andalf and B_ilbo, F_rodo was the only person known to have shown kindness towards G_ollum, who was hated instantly by everyone he met, being perceived as filthy, slimy, sneaky and suspect by groups as different as the Orcs of C_irith Ungol and the Rangers of I_thilien.

When the B_lack Gate was reached and found to be well guarded, G_ollum convinced them not to go that way, saying that they would be caught and S_auron would regain the R_ing. G_ollum said he would lead them south, where he knew of another entrance into M_ordor, in which F_rodo complied, despite S_am's suspicions.

F_rodo and S_am were caught by F_aramir, and G_ollum followed them. When F_rodo allowed F_aramir to briefly take G_ollum prisoner, however, he felt betrayed, allowing the "G_ollum" personality to take total control. F_aramir found out that the place G_ollum was taking them was called C_irith Ungol. He then warned F_rodo and S_am of the evil of that place.

F_rodo, S_am, and G_ollum left F_aramir and began crossing the M_orgul Vale and proceeded to climb the Stairs of C_irith Ungol, in the border-mountains of the E_phel Dúath (Mountains of Shadow). G_ollum visited the great spider S_helob, child of U_ngoliant, because he was planning to betray the H_obbits by turning them to S_helob for food and then take the R_ing for himself. The fact that G_ollum managed to forge an alliance with S_helob is also remarkable, as she was otherwise known for devouring and killing everything on sight. When he returned, the H_obbits were asleep. The sight of F_rodo sleeping nearly moved G_ollum to repent, as he began to pet F_rodo's hair. However, S_am woke up and spoke harshly to G_ollum and all hope of redemption was lost. G_ollum followed through with his plan and led F_rodo and S_am into T_orech Ungol.

Just as F_aramir warned them, G_ollum did betray them, as after leading them into S_helob's lair, G_ollum disappeared and waited for S_helob to kill them so he could claim the R_ing for himself. When S_helob started chasing after F_rodo, G_ollum used this opportunity to attack S_am. However, he was no match for S_am, who gained the upper-hand, forcing G_ollum to retreat.

F_rodo and S_am escaped from her lair and also C_irith Ungol. They came against all odds to the fiery volcano M_ount Doom. G_ollum followed them all the way, seeking a chance to surprise them and take the R_ing. When F_rodo and S_am had almost reached their destination, he attacked, but failed to get the R_ing. S_am, who had hated G_ollum on sight, tried to bR_ing himself to kill him, but he relented out of sheer pity and disgust, turning his back on the beaten (but still wily) creature.

Death
Moments later, F_rodo was standing on the edge of the C_racks of Doom, but, unable to destroy the R_ing, claimed it for himself and put it on. Then, G_ollum attacked the H_obbits again. He knocked out S_am with a rock whilst F_rodo was invisible, and then, tracking his footprints, jumped on F_rodo's shoulders. The two fought and G_ollum ultimately bit off F_rodo's finger with the R_ing on it.

Here, B_ilbo's long-ago kindness in sparing G_ollum's life was rewarded, as G_ollum then teetered on the edge of the great pit, overjoyed with finally reclaiming his "p_recious" until losing his balance and falling into the molten lava below while still holding the R_ing, causing his own death and, indirectly, the R_ing's utter destruction. Had B_ilbo taken G_ollum's life early on, the chance of S_auron's regaining the R_ing would have greatly increased as he knew where F_rodo was as soon as he put it on.

Legacy
F_rodo did forgive G_ollum, as G_andalf had pointed out to him that G_ollum was not an evil entity deserving death, but a pitiful being unnaturally and irreversibly bound to the R_ing's will, and that F_rodo would have almost certainly suffered a similar fate had he kept the R_ing.

Character
In the first edition of The H_obbit, T_olkien made no reference to his size, leading several illustrators to portray him as being very large. T_olkien realized the omission, and clarified in later editions that he was of average H_obbit size and in The Lord of the R_ings, there is a reference to S_am being "little less in height" than he is. T_olkien describes G_ollum as either dark, bone-white or sallow (pale yellow): at one point, the Rangers of I_thilien mistake his silhouette (seen from a distance) for a tailless black squirrel. G_orbag and S_hagrat describe him as a dark fellow. In a manuscript written to guide illustrators to the appearance of his characters, T_olkien explained this by saying that G_ollum had pale skin, but wore dark clothes and was often seen in poor light. The H_obbit states he has pockets, in which he keeps a tooth sharpening rock, goblin teeth, wet shells, and a scrap of bat wing. Despite these details, he is generally depicted wearing a loincloth or naked in illustrations and adaptations.

G_ollum was a very good survivor, and his keen eyed and quickness of hand made him an excellent fisherman. He could spot and catch fish in almost any level of light and water. He fished the waters of the M_isty Mountain's underground lake for centuries in almost complete darkness and almost anywhere he had to after leaving his cave in search of the R_ing and the "thief" B_aggins. He was known to eat almost anything that was living or edible and could stomach anything raw and uncooked. He was also very good at not being seen and was an excellent waterman, making use of anything that could float which made it possible for him to follow the Fellowship for so long.
