The T_wo Towers: Being the Second Part of The Lord of the R_ings is a novel written by J_.R.R. T_olkien. It is preceded by The Fellowship of the R_ing and followed by The R_eturn of the King.

T_olkien came up with the title under deadline pressure and later expressed dissatisfaction with it. In letters and one sketch, he considered several possible sets of towers, including M_inas T_irith and B_arad-dûr, and even the possibility of leaving the matter ambiguous. However, he eventually settled on O_rthanc and M_inas M_orgul and wrote a note to this effect which appears at the end of most editions of The Fellowship of the R_ing. He also produced a final cover illustration showing these towers, but the publisher decided not to use it in order to save money on the production costs.

Loosely, any pair from a set of six towers in the story could plausibly fit the title: C_irith Ungol, O_rthanc, M_inas T_irith, B_arad-dûr, M_inas M_orgul, and the H_ornburg.

Structure
Because The T_wo Towers is the central portion of a longer work, its structure differs from that of a conventional novel. It begins and ends abruptly, without introduction to the characters, explanations of major plot elements or a satisfying conclusion. The first section follows the divergent paths of several important figures from The Fellowship of the R_ing, but tells nothing of its central character, on whose fate so much depends, enabling the reader to share in the suspense and uncertainty of the characters themselves. The narrative of the second part returns to the hero's quest to destroy the evil that threatens the world. While the first section tells of an epic battle, the struggles in much of the second are internal.

Contents
Book III: The Treason of I_sengard

The H_obbits M_erry and P_ippin escape from the Orcs who captured them when the Orcs themselves are attacked by the Riders of R_ohan. M_erry and P_ippin head into nearby F_angorn Forest where they encounter treelike giants called E_nts.

The forest generally keep to themselves, but are moved to oppose the menace posed to the trees by the wizard S_aruman, who has been chopping down trees in the forest to fuel fires for his furnaces.

A_ragorn, G_imli the Dwarf, and L_egolas the Elf, tracking M_erry and P_ippin, come across É_omer of R_ohan and his riders who tell them that they attacked the Orcs the previous night and left no survivors. However, A_ragorn is able to find small prints and they follow these into F_angorn, where they meet a white wizard who they at first believe to be S_aruman, but who turns out to be their wizard friend G_andalf, whom they believed had perished in the mines of M_oria. He tells them of his fall into the abyss, his battle to the death with the B_alrog and his reawakening. The four ride to E_doras and persuade King T_héoden that his people are in danger. In the process, S_aruman's agent in E_doras, G_ríma W_ormtongue, is expelled. A_ragorn, G_imli and L_egolas then travel to the defensive fortification of the H_ornburg, while G_andalf goes north in search of E_rkenbrand's men to br_ing as reinforcements. At the H_ornburg, they resist an onslaught of Orcs and Men sent by S_aruman, and G_andalf arrives the next morning with the W_estfold army led by E_rkenbrand just in time. The fleeing Orcs run into a forest of H_uorns; half-tree, half-ent creatures and none escape. A_ragorn, G_imli, L_egolas, T_héoden, É_omer, G_andalf and some guards then head to S_aruman's stronghold, I_sengard. There, they reunite with M_erry and P_ippin and find the fortress overrun by E_nts, who had flooded it with the nearby river and besieged O_rthanc, where S_aruman hid in refuge. After giving S_aruman a chance to repent, G_andalf casts him out of the order of wizards. W_ormtongue throws something from a window at G_andalf and those with him. This turns out to be one of the p_alantíri. P_ippin, unable to resist the urge, looks into it and has an encounter with S_auron. G_andalf and P_ippin then head for M_inas T_irith in preparation for the upcoming war.

Chapters
I - The Departure of B_oromir - A_ragorn finds B_oromir hit with many arrows, who tells him that Orcs took M_erry and P_ippin, and that they were still alive. B_oromir dies, and his body is set down over the Falls of R_auros on a 'funeral boat'; A_ragorn, L_egolas and G_imli decide to follow the Orcs who had captured M_erry and P_ippin, rather than following F_rodo and S_am. The three of them set off to chase the Orcs.
II - The Riders of R_ohan - They follow the trail of the Orcs and find several clues as to what happened with the h_obbits, then meet an é_ored of R_ohirrim led by É_omer, who tell them that the Orcs were destroyed and none were left alive. They camp near the site of the Orc massacre.
III - The U_ruk-h_ai - This chapter begins further back in time, telling the story of M_erry and P_ippin being captured by the Orcs, who are led by U_glúk from S_aruman's army, and G_rishnákh from M_ordor. The two parties of Orcs argue constantly. The Orcs camp near F_angorn Forest and G_rishnákh attempts to take the h_obbits away with him. The h_obbits escape as G_rishnákh is killed by an arrow. They flee into F_angorn Forest as the men of R_ohan attack the Orcs.
IV - T_reebeard - M_erry and P_ippin meet T_reebeard the E_nt, who calls an E_ntmoot, a gather_ing of E_nts in Derndingle. The h_obbits meet another E_nt, Q_uickbeam. After three days of deliberation, the E_nts decide at the E_ntmoot to attack I_sengard.
V - The W_hite Rider - The chapter goes back to the story of A_ragorn, L_egolas and G_imli, who discover signs that the h_obbits escaped the Orcs into the forest. They meet an old man, who they at first presume to be S_aruman, but who turns out to be G_andalf. They set off for E_doras.
VI - The King of the Golden Hall - The four of them reach E_doras and talk with King T_héoden. G_ríma W_ormtongue is expelled. T_héoden gives G_andalf the horse S_hadowfax.
VII - H_elm's Deep - A_ragorn, L_egolas and G_imli are at the H_ornburg with the R_ohirrim, defending the people of R_ohan from attack by the army of S_aruman. The Battle of the H_ornburg is fought and won.
VIII - The Road to I_sengard - They travel to I_sengard, and see that it has been destroyed. At I_sengard they find M_erry and P_ippin.
IX - Flotsam and Jetsam - M_erry and P_ippin tell the story of how the E_nts attacked I_sengard, in amongst the ruins or 'flotsam and jetsam' of the fortress.
X - The Voice of S_aruman - S_aruman has a very persuasive voice, which he almost uses to persuade T_héoden and the others until G_andalf casts him from the order of wizards. W_ormtongue throws the p_alantír of O_rthanc from the tower, which misses G_andalf, and is picked up by P_ippin.
XI - The P_alantir - P_ippin looks into the p_alantír and is seen by S_auron. G_andalf explains the origin of the p_alantír; G_andalf sets off with P_ippin for M_inas T_irith, riding on S_hadowfax.
Book IV: The Journey of the R_ingbearers / The R_ing Goes East
F_rodo and S_am discover G_ollum stalking them as they try to reach M_ount Doom to destroy the One R_ing. G_ollum hopes to reclaim the R_ing. S_am loathes and distrusts him, but F_rodo pities him. G_ollum promises to lead them to a secret entrance to M_ordor and for a time appears to be a true ally. They first stop at the B_lack Gate of M_ordor, where G_ollum persuades them not to go in, where they would surely be caught. They head south into I_thilien, and are captured by F_aramir, the brother of B_oromir. F_aramir learns from F_rodo of his brother's death and the plan to destroy the R_ing, and eventually allows them to go on their way. G_ollum leads them up the stairs of C_irith Ungol away from M_inas M_orgul and into the lair of S_helob, an enormous spider-like creature, who inflicts her poisonous bite on F_rodo. S_am resolves to finish the quest himself and takes the R_ing. However, when Orcs take F_rodo's body, he follows them and learns that F_rodo is not dead but unconscious and now their prisoner. The last line of the book is "F_rodo was alive but taken by the enemy."

Chapters
I - The Taming of S_méagol - G_ollum joins F_rodo and S_am, after S_am captures him.
II - The Passage of the Marshes - They pass through the D_ead Marshes.
III - The B_lack Gate is Closed - They reach the B_lack Gate, G_ollum persuades them not to go in, and they head south.
IV - Of Herbs and Stewed Rabbit - They reach the pleasant country of I_thilien. The title refers to the rabbits G_ollum catches that S_am cooks; the smoke from the fire causes them to be seen by men of G_ondor led by F_aramir, and they witness an ambush on a H_aradrim army, and an O_liphaunt.
V - The Window on the West - F_rodo and S_am are captured by F_aramir's men and they are blindfolded on their way to H_enneth Annûn. F_rodo and F_aramir discuss B_oromir's death.
VI - The F_orbidden Pool - F_aramir shows F_rodo they have found G_ollum at the F_orbidden Pool. F_rodo saves him from being shot by F_aramir's men.
VII - Journey to the Cross-roads - F_rodo, S_am and G_ollum leave F_aramir. They travel to the Cross-roads of the Fallen King where the M_orgul-road between O_sgiliath and M_inas M_orgul intersects with the H_arad Road.
VIII - The Stairs of C_irith Ungol - They witness an army, led by the W_itch-king of A_ngmar, leaving M_inas M_orgul and climb up the stairs.
IX - S_helob's Lair - G_ollum betrays F_rodo and S_am as they encounter with S_helob the spider.
X - The Choices of Master S_amwise - F_rodo is taken by the Orcs. S_am listens to the Orcs talking about him, which is how he finds out that he is still alive (he had thought that S_helob had killed F_rodo).
