The Fellowship of the R_ing: Being the First Part of The Lord of the R_ings is a novel written by J.R.R. T_olkien. It is divided into Book I and Book II. It was originally released on July 29, 1954 in the United Kingdom by Allen & Unwin. Its story is followed by The T_wo Towers and concluded by The R_eturn of the King.

Contents
Prologue
The book begins with a foreword and a prologue Concerning H_obbits, and Other Matters summarizing the events of The H_obbit. It gives the backstory of the O_ne R_ing and how it came to be. It tells the backstory of S_méagol and his friend D_éagol, and how they came upon the R_ing after S_auron was temporarily defeated. It also explains how B_ilbo B_aggins found the R_ing once S_méagol (who had become Gollum) had lost it. B_ilbo returns to B_ag End in the S_hire, and the story of F_rodo B_aggins, B_ilbo's nephew, begins.

The first sets the stage for the adventure and follows F_rodo B_aggins as he flees from his home in the S_hire to escape the minions of the Dark Lord S_auron. S_auron seeks the O_ne R_ing that will allow him to control the Bearers of the nineteen other R_ings of Power and control the three major races of M_iddle-earth: Elves, Men, and Dwarves. The O_ne R_ing has been inherited by F_rodo who finds himself unwittingly in the midst of a struggle for world domination.

The first chapter in the book begins quite lightly, following on from The H_obbit which is more of a whimsical children's story than The Lord of the R_ings. It begins with B_ilbo celebrating his 111th (or eleventy first) birthday, on the same day that F_rodo celebrates his 33rd birthday (his 'coming of age'). At the birthday party, B_ilbo disappears after his speech, to the surprise of all. F_rodo later learns about the ring which he had used to make himself invisible, and also about some of its darker powers.

Heeding the advice of the wizard G_andalf, F_rodo leaves his home, taking the R_ing with him. He hopes to reach R_ivendell, where he will be safe from S_auron, and where those wiser than he can decide what to do about the R_ing.

In his journey he is accompanied by three H_obbit friends, P_eregrin T_ook, M_eriadoc B_randybuck and S_amwise G_amgee, often referred to as M_erry, P_ippin and S_am. From the start they are pursued by B_lack Riders, the R_ingwraiths who serve S_auron. Narrowly escaping these and other dangers and meeting other interesting characters en route (e.g., T_om B_ombadil) they eventually come to B_ree, where they meet S_trider, another friend of G_andalf who leads them the rest of the way to R_ivendell, through further hardships. F_rodo is stabbed upon the mountain of W_eathertop by the Lord of the N_azgûl with a M_orgul-knife - as part of the knife stays inside him, he gets sicker on the rest of the journey. They also pass the trolls which had been turned to stone in the previous book, The H_obbit.

Book II chronicles F_rodo's stay at R_ivendell, where a plan is hatched at the C_ouncil of E_lrond to destroy the R_ing in M_ordor. Early on F_rodo meets his uncle B_ilbo, whom he had not seen since he left H_obbiton seventeen years earlier. F_rodo sets forth from R_ivendell with nine companions: two Men, A_ragorn and B_oromir, son of the Steward of the land of G_ondor; an Elven prince, L_egolas; F_rodo's old friend and powerful wizard, G_andalf; Gimli the Dwarf; and F_rodo's original three H_obbit companions. These N_ine Walkers, the Fellowship of the R_ing, were chosen to represent the free races of M_iddle-earth and as a balance to the Nine Riders. They were also accompanied by B_ill the Pony, whom S_trider and the H_obbits acquired in B_ree as a pack horse. Their attempt to cross the M_isty Mountains is foiled by heavy snow, so they are forced to take a path under the mountains via M_oria, an ancient Dwarf kingdom, now full of Orcs and other evil creatures, such as the Watcher in the Water guarding the west gate. Just before escaping M_oria, G_andalf falls into the abyss while battling a B_alrog.

The remaining eight members of the Fellowship then spend some time in the elf-haven of L_othlórien, where they receive gifts from the Elf-lady G_aladriel that in many cases prove useful later in the quest. They leave L_órien by river, but F_rodo begins to realize the R_ing is having a malevolent effect on some members of the party, especially B_oromir, who tries to take the R_ing from F_rodo. In the process, F_rodo puts on the R_ing to escape him. Later B_oromir is attacked by Orcs while trying to defend M_erry and P_ippin. This book ends when F_rodo and Sam depart secretly for M_ordor and the Fellowship of the R_ing dissolves.
