R_eturn of the King

In order to defend the city, A_ragorn travelled the P_aths of the Dead, and summoned the Dead Men of D_unharrow who owed allegiance to the Heir of I_sildur. It had been prophesied by  I_sildur and M_albeth the Seer that the Dead would be summoned once more to pay their debt for betraying G_ondor an age before. With their aid the Corsairs of U_mbar were defeated at the Battle of P_elargir.

 A_ragorn, a small force of Rangers, and a large contingent of men and soldiers from the southern regions then sailed up the A_nduin to M_inas T_irith. When they arrived at the Battle of the P_elennor Fields, A_ragorn unfurled a standard that A_rwen had made for him which showed both the W_hite Tree of G_ondor along with the jeweled crown and seven stars of the House of E_lendil. With the help of the southern forces the armies of G_ondor and R_ohan rallied together and defeated S_auron's army.

The Steward D_enethor II declared that he would not bow to a descendant of  I_sildur (years before, he had seen "T_horongil" as a rival to his father's favor and soon discovered his true identity) and burned himself to death during the battle, despairing of final victory. A_ragorn healed F_aramir, D_enethor's last heir, É_owyn and M_erry, who together slew the W_itch-king as well as many others. This won him the immediate recognition of F_aramir as rightful heir to the throne; his humility and self-sacrifice gained him the hearts of the inhabitants of G_ondor's capital city. A_ragorn's healing abilities, moreover, were a sign to the people of G_ondor of the identity of their true king; as I_oreth said, "T_he hands of the King are the hands of a healer, and so shall the rightful king be known." The people hailed him as King that same evening.

Despite his immediate success and popularity, however, and despite his claim to the throne through raising the royal banner, A_ragorn decided to lay aside his claim for the time being. He knew that if he aggressively promoted his claim, rival claimants or debates as to his legitimacy were not out of the question, and this could be a fatal distraction for G_ondor at a time when the West needed to be united against S_auron. So, to avoid conflict, after he had healed people during the following nights of March 15–16, he left M_inas T_irith and symbolically refused to enter it again until he was crowned King on May 1.

Captain of the West
 A_ragorn then led the Host of the West to M_ordor as per the advice of G_andalf and E_lrond, to divert S_auron's attention from F_rodo and S_am. They marched over the A_nduin river and came to M_inas M_orgul, and set fire to the fields there. Leaving a guard at the Cross-roads of the Fallen King, they began to march north along the North Road of I_thilien, and A_ragorn won a skirmish against some Orcs and E_asterlings that tried to ambush them. They then reached the desert before M_ordor, and A_ragorn allowed those who were afraid to depart to retake C_air Andros. The Army of the West then reached the B_lack Gate, and A_ragorn along with G_andalf, É_omer, I_mrahil, P_ippin, L_egolas and G_imli rode up to it and called for S_auron to come forth. He then watched as the Mouth of S_auron revealed S_auron knew about F_rodo and S_am, and saw G_andalf's rejection of S_auron's terms. The Host of the West was then encircled by S_auron's forces, a vast army of Orcs and Men. A_ragorn then arranged the Army of the West defensively on two S_lag-hills and the Battle of the M_orannon began.

After the destruction of R_ing and the defeat of S_auron, A_ragorn freed the slaves of N_úrn and gifted them the entire land in southern M_ordor.
