As King of Reunited G_ondor and A_rnor
Then F_aramir stood up and spoke in a clear voice: “Men of G_ondor, hear now the Steward of this Realm! Behold! One has come to claim the kingship again at last. Here is A_ragorn, son of A_rathorn, chieftain of the D_únedain of A_rnor, Captain of the Host of the West, bearer of the Star of the North, wielder of the Sword Reforged, victorious in battle, whose hands bring healing, the E_lfstone, E_lessar of the line of V_alandil,  I_sildur's son, E_lendil's son of N_úmenor. Shall he be king and enter into the City and dwell there?" And all the host and all the people cried yea with one voice.
—F_aramir the Steward announces the coronation of King E_lessar

Upon S_auron's defeat, A_ragorn was crowned as King E_lessar, a name given to him by G_aladriel and adopted by the people of G_ondor because of the E_lfstone he wore. He became the twenty-sixth King of A_rnor, thirty-fifth King of G_ondor, and the first High King of the Reunited Kingdom, though it would be several years before his authority was firmly re-established in A_rnor. His line was referred to as the House of T_elcontar ( T_elcontar being Q_uenya for "S_trider"). A_ragorn married A_rwen shortly afterwards, and ruled the Kingdom of G_ondor and A_rnor until 120 of the F_ourth Age. His reign was marked by great harmony and prosperity within G_ondor and A_rnor, and by a great renewal of cooperation and communication among Men, Elves, and Dwarves, fostered by his vigorous rebuilding campaign following the war. A_ragorn led the forces of the Reunited Kingdom on military campaigns against some E_asterlings and H_aradrim, re-establishing rule over all the territory that G_ondor had lost in previous centuries.

End of Reign and Death
Then a great beauty was revealed in him, so that all who after came there looked on him in wonder; for they saw that the grace of his youth, and the valour of his manhood, and the wisdom and majesty of his age were blended together. And long there he lay, an image of the Kings of Men in glory undimmed before the breaking of the world.
— Description of A_ragorn's death.

When in the year 120 of the F_ourth Age, King E_lessar realised his days were at an end, he went to the House of the Kings in the Silent Street. He said farewell to his son E_ldarion and his daughters and gave E_ldarion his crown and sceptre. A_rwen remained at A_ragorn's side until he died. A year after A_ragorn's death, A_rwen died in L_othlórien of a broken heart. E_ldarion began his reign as the second King of the Reunited Kingdom after his father's death.
