
Identity
The "first term" of the character that later evolved into A_ragorn or S_trider was a peculiar h_obbit met by B_ingo B_olger-B_aggins (precursor of F_rodo B_aggins) at the Inn of the P_rancing Pony. His description and behavior, however, was already quite close to the final story, with the difference that the h_obbit wore wooden shoes, and was nicknamed T_rotter for the "clitter-clap" sound that they produced. He was also accounted to be "one of the wild folk — Rangers", and he played the same role in F_rodo's journey to R_ivendell as in The L_ord of R_ings.

Later T_olkien hesitated about the true identity of "T_rotter" for a long time. One of his notes suggested that the Rangers should not be h_obbits as originally planned, and that this would mean that T_rotter was either a Man or a h_obbit who associated himself with the Rangers and was "very well known" (within the story). The latter suggestion was linked to an early comment of B_ingo: "I keep on feeling that I have seen him somewhere before". T_olkien made a proposal that T_rotter might be B_ilbo B_aggins himself, but rejected that idea.

Another suggestion was that T_rotter was "F_osco T_ook (B_ilbo's first cousin), who vanished when a lad, owing to G_andalf". This story was further elaborated, making T_rotter a nephew of B_ilbo, named P_eregrin B_offin, and an elder cousin of F_rodo. He was said to have run away after he came of age, some twenty years before B_ilbo's party, and had helped G_andalf in tracking G_ollum later. A hint was also given as to why T_rotter wore wooden shoes: he had been captured by the Dark Lord in M_ordor and tortured, but saved by G_andalf; a note was added by T_olkien in the margin, saying that it would later be revealed that T_rotter had wooden feet.

The conception of T_rotter being a h_obbit was discarded with the following recommencing of writing; another short-lived idea was to make T_rotter "a disguised Elf − friend of B_ilbo's in R_ivendell", and a scout from R_ivendell who "pretends to be a Ranger".

Quite soon T_olkien finally settled on the Mannish identity of T_rotter, from the beginning introducing him as a "descendant of the ancient men of the North, and one of E_lrond's household", as well as the name A_ragorn. While the history of N_úmenor and the descendants of E_lros and E_lendil were not fully developed, the terms of it were in existence, and would come to be connected with The L_ord of R_ings as the character of A_ragorn developed. Thus the evolution of the history of the Second and T_hird Ages was dependent on the bringing of T_rotter to association with them.

Further development
The development of A_ragorn's connection to G_ondor was long and complex, as was his association with B_oromir. Initially it is said that A_ragorn's forefathers were the exiles of N_úmenor who ruled over the people of Ond (the early name of G_ondor), but were driven out by the Wizard King "when S_auron raised a rebellion". The story of the two branches of E_lendil's descendants ruling over two kingdoms of Men through many generations only emerged gradually; at one time, T_olkien even seems to have conceived only three generations between I_sildur and A_ragorn.

One significant feature which was not established until late stages was A_ragorn's relationship with A_rwen. When T_olkien first introduced É_owyn, the interest which she showed towards A_ragorn was not one-sided, with suggestions in notes that they would marry at the end of the story. Another proposal was done soon, that É_owyn would die to save or avenge T_héoden, and A_ragorn would never marry after her death.

The first mention of E_lrond's daughter, named A_rwen U_ndómiel, was in reference to the banner which she made for A_ragorn, but T_olkien did not give any hint whether she had any further part to play. The references to her marriage with A_ragorn were made later, but it was explicitly stated only near the completion of the book. It is only in his working on the appendices for The L_ord of R_ings that T_olkien recorded the published version of The Tale of A_ragorn and A_rwen.

A passing idea was that G_aladriel gave her R_ing to A_ragorn, and that he would accordingly be titled the "Lord of R_ing".

Rejected names
The original nickname T_rotter was retained for a long while, and T_olkien decided to change it to  S_trider only after the story was completed. There were also several experimental translations of T_rotter to S_indarin: P_adathir, Du-finnion and R_imbedir, with E_cthelion possibly being equivalent to P_eregrin (B_offin). Instead of the latter title "the D_únadan", Q_uenya T_arkil ("Noble Man") was first used, synonym with N_úmenórean.

T_olkien hesitated for some time about T_rotter's "real" name. Although A_ragorn was the first suggestion when the Mannish descent was settled, it was changed a number of times. At one point T_olkien decided that an Elvish name does not suit a Man, and thus altered it from A_ragorn via E_lfstone to I_ngold, where the last one is an Old English name with ing- representing "west". Later, however, a new plot element was introduced: G_aladriel's gift of a green stone, and T_olkien reverted the usage to E_lfstone in order to make an additional connection. This was retained into the final version of the legendarium as a side name and a translation of E_lessar.
