
Quest of E_rebor
B_alin was part of the company assembled by T_horin O_akenshield in T_A 2941 that journeyed to the L_onely Mountain with B_ilbo B_aggins and G_andalf to defeat S_maug, and to retake the kingdom of E_rebor. He was the second Dwarf to arrive at B_ilbo's home, where, like his brother D_walin, he played a viol as big as himself. Following the meeting's conclusion and the company's initial departure to the G_reen Dragon Inn, B_alin spotted B_ilbo hurrying to reach them before they set out.

B_alin, along with his companions, underwent the journey through the T_rollshaws and L_one-lands to R_ivendell, including the encounter with the trolls Tom, Bert, and William.[3] The company rested in R_ivendell for some time, and after setting out to cross the M_isty Mountains, were captured by Orcs on the High Pass, after taking refuge from a thunderstorm.[4] With G_andalf's help, the Dwarves escaped, and subsequently B_alin was posted as a lookout when B_ilbo returned, having been separated from the company during their flight. Due to B_ilbo's usage of the One R_ing, which he had discovered in the Orc tunnels, the H_obbit crept by B_alin unnoticed, puzzling the Dwarf a great deal. Soon afterwards, the company was beset by W_args, which forced them to climb a number of pine trees until their rescue by the Great E_agles.[5]

The E_agles took them to their eyrie, and then to the C_arrock, from whence the company traveled to B_eorn's hall.[5] G_andalf decided to introduce the Dwarves by pairs so as not to overwhelm B_eorn, and B_alin and D_walin were chosen to come first. Having been welcomed by the skin-changer and given rest and provisions, the company set out to cross the forest of M_irkwood.[6] Despite having been warned to the contrary, the Dwarves eventually left the path after running low on supplies, and were soon waylaid by great spiders, which intended to eat them. B_ilbo used the R_ing to escape notice, and returned to free them. B_alin afterwards led the company in escaping from and fighting off the spiders, though the Dwarves were captured by Wood-elves, and taken to the hall of the Elvenking, T_hranduil. It was here that B_alin spoke for his companions, arguing for their release. T_hranduil refused, and imprisoned the Dwarves, until B_ilbo again rescued the company.[7]

The Dwarves came to L_ake-town,[8] and then to the L_onely Mountain. After opening the Side-door to the mountain,[9] B_alin was the only member of the company willing to go with B_ilbo some way inside. The H_obbit, after unintentionally disturbing the dragon S_maug, returned to the Dwarves, but S_maug left his lair and attempted to kill the Dwarves before turning to L_ake-town, with the intent to destroy it.[10] The dragon was there slain by Bard, and the Dwarves took possession of the mountain.[11] T_horin and B_alin, not long after, came upon the raven R_oäc, who brought word of the dragon's demise.[12]

B_alin fought in and survived the subsequent B_attle of Five Armies, which was fought against Orcs led by B_olg, after tensions with the L_ake-men and Wood-elves had run high, due to a disagreement about the division of S_maug's treasure.[13] He took up residence at the L_onely Mountain afterwards with the surviving members of the company.

Visiting B_ilbo
Seven years after the Quest for E_rebor, B_alin accompanied G_andalf to visit B_ilbo in The S_hire in T_A 2949, since the two had become good friends during their travels. He and G_andalf gave B_ilbo the news of current happenings in M_iddle-earth.[14]

Sometime afterward in the coming years before his expedition in T_A 2989, B_alin would visit B_ilbo at least one more time. D_uring this visit to The S_hire, B_alin met B_ilbo's newly adopted heir of B_ag End, F_rodo, and the young H_obbit would come to learn of some of B_alin and his Uncle's travels to the L_onely Mountain.
