Discovery of the One R_ing
B_ilbo and his companions then traveled from R_ivendell and made their way to the High Pass of the Misty Mountains, where they witnessed the distant thunder-battle of giants. It was here the company, after taking shelter in what they took to be a simple cave, were captured by Orcs and taken to G_oblin-town. With G_andalf's help, they escaped from the Great G_oblin and his servants. D_ori, however, who was carrying B_ilbo, was grabbed from behind by an orc, and in the ensuing struggle B_ilbo lost consciousness and was inadvertently left by his companions.[4]

Coming to and finding himself alone, B_ilbo crawled his way through the pitch-black tunnel, using his H_obbit nose to gain a sense of direction. He eventually stumbled upon a small R_ing, but thought nothing of it, and put it in his back pocket. Although he did not know it, this lost trinket was the One R_ing, forged by the Dark Lord S_auron thousands of years ago. B_ilbo soon encountered G_ollum, who had been in possession of the R_ing for over five hundred years. The two challenged each other to a Riddle-game with the condition that G_ollum would show the way out if B_ilbo won. However, G_ollum was not satisfied with B_ilbo's final riddle, and while mourning his loss, found that his R_ing was gone. G_ollum then realized the answer to B_ilbo's riddle, "What have I got in my pocket?" and paddled back on his boat towards B_ilbo, who he then accused of stealing his p_recious, but B_ilbo had vanished.[5]

G_ollum, thinking B_ilbo had known the way out and was leaving, headed to the exit and was followed by B_ilbo. B_ilbo was soon reunited with his companions. B_ilbo and the travelers had stopped for the night when orcs and a pack of Wargs found them near a patch of pine trees. The Dwarves, B_ilbo, and G_andalf climbed up the trees to escape, but the orcs were not going to leave without killing them. They started to burn the trees down. The chief wolf was ordeR_ing the other wargs around when G_andalf picked up a pinecone, and with his magic set it ablaze in a green fire. He threw it down hitting the chieftain. It rolled around on the ground burning while G_andalf threw more and more pinecones down. The G_oblins and wargs fled and the group was rescued by the Great Eagles. When one of the eagles grabbed D_ori, B_ilbo had to jump and grab D_ori's legs before he was forgotten. This prompted B_ilbo to groan "My arms! My poor arms," and D_ori to cry, "My legs! My poor legs!" The eagles eventually took them to the Great Shelf where they rested and continued their journey.[6]
