Returning to S_hire-life
Although B_ilbo returned safely to B_ag End with his reward and lived in relative comfort, B_ilbo’s life was not quite the same as it had once been. His sudden return after having been thought dead lost him some of the neighbors’ respect and he was later thought of as an oddity, and there were many talks and false rumors circulated about his affairs and doings. The worst of these problems came from the S_ackville-B_agginses, who were angry that they were not able to possess B_ag End when he was thought to be dead. This jealousy and anger increased when B_ilbo adopted his second-cousin-once-removed F_rodo (a B_randybuck on his mother's side) as his heir presumptive. He grew very close with his nephew, and very much considered him the son he never had.

B_ilbo ignored these things said about him and avoided the S_ackville-B_agginses as much as he could, even using the R_ing once to hide from them. B_ilbo was very generous with his money and most people were willing to forgive him for his oddities. He had many friends especially amongst the G_amgees whom he consulted frequently on landscaping and on the growing of vegetables. His good friend Hamfast G_amgee even allowed him to tutor his son S_amwise G_amgee. B_ilbo taught him to read and write, and at some point taught him various bits of poetry and told him tales of the elder days. Yet, he slowly began to become weary of his settled and sheltered life at B_ag End.

B_ilbo was the bearer of the One R_ing for six decades, ignorant of its significance. However, by T_A 3001, the R_ing had begun to affect him. He did not appear to have aged at all, although he felt older and thin inside. He decided that he wanted to partake in one last adventure before he found a place to settle down and finish his account of the Quest for the L_onely Mountain.

On September 22, a Farewell Birthday Party was held in his honor, with even G_andalf returning for a visit. During the fesitivties, he is forced to hide from the S_ackville-B_agginses once more with F_rodo in tow, and secretly assures himself that F_rodo will alright without him. Nearing the end of his party, he announced his intention to leave the S_hire, to the shock of his family and friends, especially F_rodo. Immediately afterward, he put on his R_ing and disappeared, as a joke on his neighbors. He returned to his house where he was confronted by his friend G_andalf, who tried to persuade him to leave the R_ing for F_rodo. B_ilbo initially agreed, but then became hostile and accused G_andalf of trying to steal the R_ing for his own benefit, which he referred to as his "p_recious."

"Well, if you want my R_ing yourself, say so! But you won't get it. I won't give my P_recious away, I tell you."
—B_ilbo B_aggins[20]

Horrified by B_ilbo's outburst, G_andalf stood to his full height and ordered B_ilbo to leave it behind. Immediately B_ilbo returned to his senses, apologizing and admitting that the R_ing had been troubling him lately. G_andalf then asks B_ilbo to trust his old friend as he had all those years ago, and let the R_ing go. After a moment of inner struggle, B_ilbo finally dropped the R_ing to the ground, becoming the first R_ing-bearer to give up the R_ing of his own will. B_ilbo and G_andalf bade each other goodbye, and B_ilbo left the S_hire for his journey.

On the same day, B_ilbo left the One R_ing and his home of B_ag End in the possession of his relative, F_rodo B_aggins, who was eager to be his own master despite the loss of B_ilbo, for he was not yet ready to leave the S_hire. After his departure, B_ilbo wandered to R_ivendell and then, after a rest, accompanied some Dwarves to D_ale and the L_onely Mountain, before returning to R_ivendell.
