Quest of E_rebor
A_n Unexpected Journey
In the year T_A 2941, B_ilbo, at the age of 50, was visited by G_andalf, whom he had not seen for quite some time, outside his home at B_ag End. G_andalf invited B_ilbo on an unspecified adventure, which was flatly refused by the H_obbit, who bade the wizard a "Good morning", and went inside.

Undeterred, G_andalf continued in his plan, sending thirteen Dwarves, led by T_horin II, to B_ag End the very day. These Dwarves, needing an additional member for their company, initially came by pairs, and lastly with G_andalf, who had himself selected B_ilbo as the best person for the Dwarves' job. The Dwarves explained to B_ilbo their background and purpose; that they were among the Dwarves of E_rebor who had been forced from E_rebor when the dragon S_maug attacked and taken up residence there. They now had determined to reclaim the mountain and needed a "burglar" to help them in situations requiR_ing stealth. B_ilbo reluctantly agreed to go, and the next morning they set off from the G_reen Dragon Inn.[1]

T_horin and company traveled through the L_one-lands along high hills and beside castles. After approximately one month since their outset, G_andalf disappeared. Ó_in and G_lóin failed to make a fire During a rainy night, and B_alin spotted a fire in the distance, which was rare in those regions, and sent B_ilbo to investigate. At the fire were three Stone-trolls, Tom, Bert, and William. B_ilbo attempted to snatch something from the trolls to bR_ing back to the Dwarves, to show that he was a first-class burglar. However, he was caught by William, but he escaped and was helpless to prevent all the Dwarves from being captured when they came looking for him. Fortunately for the Dwarves, G_andalf returned and saved them all by imitating the trolls' voices and tricking the trolls into arguing with one another until daybreak, which turned them all to stone.

After rescuing the party, the wizard led B_ilbo and the party to the T_rolls' lair, which the trolls had used to hide their treasure and shield themselves from the sun During the daylight hours. In the cave, a number of weapons were found, G_lamdring (Beater) and O_rcrist (Biter) among them. B_ilbo took an Elvish dagger from the trolls' collection, no longer than a small knife in size, which he would later name S_ting. He kept it with him for the rest of his adventure, wearing it inside his breeches.[2]

In June the company came to R_ivendell. During their visit, B_ilbo met Lord E_lrond, and became enchanted with the Elves. On midsummer eve E_lrond inspected the swords of T_horin and G_andalf and looked at Thrór's Map, which G_andalf had previously given to T_horin at the behest of T_horin's father T_hráin II. E_lrond explained that the swords were forged in G_ondolin and were named O_rcrist and G_lamdring. When inspecting the map E_lrond found Moon-letters that spoke of the Side-door of E_rebor, which read: Stand by the grey stone when the thrush knocks and the setting sun with the last light of Durin's Day will shine upon the keyhole.[3]
