The L_onely Mountain
Before long T_horin's company departed L_ake-town, and crossing the river, followed Thrórs Map to the location of the Side-door before the end of Durin's Day. Upon discovering the keyhole, the door was opened and B_ilbo was sent in alone in order to scout ahead and perhaps to steal some treasure from S_maug.[11] When he arrived in the treasure chamber, however, S_maug was awake and sensed his presence, and so B_ilbo put on the R_ing to avoid being seen.

S_maug, though unable to see the H_obbit, tried to figure out who or what the intruder was, but B_ilbo refused to tell the dragon his true identity, answeR_ing S_maug's questions only in riddles. While invisible, B_ilbo noticed that S_maug had a bare spot on his jewel-encrusted underbelly. Finally, B_ilbo removed the R_ing and S_maug saw that he had stolen a cup, causing him to go into a terrible rage. After B_ilbo made it out of S_maug's lair safely, he convinced T_horin and the other Dwarves to enter the side-door and close it behind them, which saved their lives when S_maug left the mountain, and flying to the side-door, scorched the surrounding area. Foiled, the dragon flew off to L_ake-town with the intent to destroy it once and for all.[12] B_ilbo afterwards relayed to the Dwarves what he had learned, but a thrush, heaR_ing the information, flew to L_ake-town and told Bard, a descendant of the D_ale-men, of S_maug's weakness. On S_maug's arrival, Bard shot the black arrow at the bare spot, killing S_maug and sending him to rot at the bottom of the lake, but destroying most of L_ake-town.[13]

The B_attle of Five Armies and aftermath
"There is more in you of good than you know, child of the kindly West. Some courage and some wisdom, blended in measure. If more of us valued food and cheer and a song above hoarded gold, it would be a merrier world."
—The H_obbit, "The Return Journey"

In the meantime, T_horin and company had reclaimed the L_onely Mountain, though B_ilbo, having found the A_rkenstone that T_horin greatly desired, kept it secret from the Dwarf.[14] They were informed by Roäc, an old raven of the mountain, of S_maug's death in L_ake-town, but quickly the Dwarves' mirth was dampened by the news that the surviving Men of L_ake-town and the Elven-king's army were marching to the mountain to reclaim their wealth. T_horin, suspicious of the armies, refused to make any deal, with them at their arrival, and barricaded the mountain, thus beginning a siege.[15] B_ilbo, hoping to avoid conflict, took the A_rkenstone to Bard and T_hranduil, in order for them to barter their share of the treasure with. Despite Bard and the Elvenking's offers for the H_obbit to stay with them for the time being, B_ilbo decided to return to the mountain. To his surprise on leaving to return to T_horin's company, he found that G_andalf had returned, and found the wizard supported his decision. B_ilbo then slipped back to the mountain, unnoticed by the Dwarves.[16]

T_horin, on soon afterwards discovering B_ilbo's perceived treachery, was furious and banished the H_obbit from the mountain. B_ilbo stayed with G_andalf and Bard for a short time, until Dwarves from the I_ron Hills, led by D_áin I_ronfoot, arrived to aid T_horin's cause. However, shortly following this, a great army of G_oblins, led by B_olg, attacked, forcing the Dwarves, Elves, and Men to fight together to both defend the mountain and survive. This became known as the B_attle of Five Armies, and though the G_oblins were defeated, T_horin and his nephews F_íli and K_íli were mortally wounded. B_ilbo only witnessed part of the battle, as he was rendered unconscious early on, and wearing the R_ing, lay undiscovered until he came to following the battle's conclusion.[17] B_eorn, chieftain of the B_eornings, who had joined the fight, slew B_olg, scattered his bodyguard, and carried T_horin to safety. B_ilbo, making his way to the tents of the wounded, found T_horin lying on a bed, in his last minutes of life. T_horin praised B_ilbo and apologized to him for cursing him earlier, and thereafter passed away.

After T_horin's funeral, the new king D_áin II offered him his one-fourteenth share of the treasure, but B_ilbo declined, receiving only two small chests, one with gold, and the other laden with silver. B_ilbo traveled back with the wood-elf host that participated in the B_attle of Five Armies. B_ilbo traveled with the wood-elves down to M_irkwood, and then went to B_eorn's house with G_andalf.[18] Then B_ilbo set out with G_andalf to where Bert, Tom, and William had turned to stone. They dug up some of the buried treasure the Dwarves had buried earlier, most of which B_ilbo offered to G_andalf to use to aid the peoples of M_iddle-earth. When they at last came to the borders of the S_hire, the two parted, with G_andalf going his own way.

B_ilbo eventually made it back to H_obbiton, where he found a Sale taking place at which his relatives, the S_ackville-B_agginses, believing him dead, were selling most of his possessions to the other H_obbits. The S_ackville-B_agginses were vexed to see B_ilbo alive, since they wanted to live in B_ag End themselves. B_ilbo had to buy back his sold possessions in order to avoid quarreling with the purchasers. After some years, B_alin and G_andalf visited him, where they reported the current news of M_iddle-earth.[19]
