Discovering the One R_ing
"But fear no more! I would not take this thing, if it lay by the highway. Not were M_inas T_irith falling in ruin and I alone could save her, so, using the weapon of the Dark Lord for her good and my glory. No, I do not wish for such triumphs, F_rodo son of D_rogo."
—F_aramir to F_rodo after guessing what the H_obbit carries[6]
During a battle with S_outhrons, F_aramir, who had taken over his brother's position as the Captain of the W_hite Tower, encountered the H_obbits F_rodo B_aggins and S_amwise G_amgee, recognizing them to be the H_alflings his dream spoke of. After the skirmish, F_aramir questioned F_rodo about his riddle and I_sildur's Bane, but, realizing what he was talking about, quickly switched to the topic of B_oromir's death and sought answers as to its circumstances. He then decided to take the pair to H_enneth Annûn.[3]

En route, F_aramir continued questioning F_rodo confidentially, and based on F_rodo's answers and his own intuition determined that F_rodo was carrying some great evil weapon of the Dark Lord of the Enemy. But rather than take it for himself or G_ondor, he assured F_rodo he would never use such as weapon.

F_aramir ate with F_rodo and S_am, and listened to F_rodo's tales of their journey up to that point, and in turn told the H_obbits of G_ondor's decline. During their discussion, S_am accidentally revealed B_oromir's desire for the Enemy’s R_ing, I_sildur's Bane. Despite the h_obbits’ fears, F_aramir remained true to his vow, for he was wise enough to realize that such a weapon could not be used for good. With this knowledge, he also realized the peril his brother had faced.[6]

On the very same night, G_ollum was spotted fishing in the F_orbidden Pool next to H_enneth Annûn—an act punishable by death. However F_aramir listened to F_rodo’s pleas to spare G_ollum’s life, and after interrogating the creature he decided that F_rodo and S_am would be free in the Lands of G_ondor and G_ollum under F_rodo's protection. Giving them provisions, he sent them on their way to continue their quest. At their parting, F_aramir warned F_rodo of G_ollum's treacherous nature and that the path G_ollum had proposed (C_irith Ungol) had an evil reputation of old.[4]
