Siege of G_ondor
F_aramir and his company retreated to C_air Andros, an island in the River A_nduin that guarded the northern approaches to M_inas T_irith. After noting that the sky was now covered in complete darkness, F_aramir sent his company south to reinforce the garrison at O_sgiliath while he and three of his men rode to M_inas T_irith directly. Along the way, they were pursued by the N_azgûl, riding Black Wings. The men, except F_aramir, were unhorsed and it was the Captain, a master of both beasts and men, who was still horsed and rode back to aid the fallen. If G_andalf had not intervened, they would have surely perished.

Arriving at M_inas T_irith, F_aramir reported to D_enethor and G_andalf of his encounter with F_rodo and S_am. D_enethor was angered that F_aramir had not brought the R_ing to G_ondor, wishing that he and his brother’s places had been reversed, since D_enethor believed that B_oromir would have brought the Enemy’s weapon to him.

D_enethor sent his remaining son to hold Western O_sgiliath against the hosts of the Enemy that outnumbered their own greatly. Although F_aramir disagreed with his father’s strategy, he agreed to go.

F_aramir: "Then farewell! But if I should return, think better of me!"
D_enethor: "That depends on the manner of your return."
—F_aramir and D_enethor's exchange of words[7]
After a day of fighting the W_itch-king's army overwhelmed the men of G_ondor and won O_sgiliath. F_aramir drew back to the Causeway Forts, the defence of which lasted another day, with many of the defenders being wounded or killed. F_aramir decided to stay with the rear guard in order to make sure that the retreat over P_elennor Fields would not turn into a rout. As the force neared M_inas T_irith it was overtaken by Orcs and H_aradrim and F_aramir was gravely wounded by a poisonous arrow. Fortunately, G_andalf and F_aramir's uncle, Prince I_mrahil of Dol A_mroth, led a cavalry sortie that successfully covered the retreat. I_mrahil bore F_aramir back to D_enethor, telling him that his son had done great deeds.

Regretting that he had thanklessly sent his son off in needless peril without his blessing, D_enethor, after looking in the palantír, believed that the R_ing was captured and the end was near. Thus he ordered his servants to build a funeral pyre for him and his son. Despite the protests of the H_obbit, P_eregrin T_ook (serving the Steward in payment of B_oromir's death) that F_aramir was still alive, D_enethor continued with his plans and released the H_obbit from his service.[10]

Horrified, P_ippin went to alert G_andalf and B_eregond, one of the Tower Guards. B_eregond, who loved his captain enough to abandon his post and risk his life protecting him, stopped the servants from lighting the pyre, killing several. P_ippin returned with G_andalf, who intervened by taking F_aramir off the pyre as F_aramir moaned out to his father in his fevered dreams. D_enethor took out a knife, trying to take F_aramir back, but B_eregond placed himself in front of F_aramir. Seeing that he could not win, D_enethor lit the pyre and laid himself down upon it, burning himself alive.[10]
