Recovery and last days of the T_hird Age
Then, F_aramir was laid in the H_ouses of Healing. His wound from the H_aradrim arrow, along with weariness and grief concerning his constantly strained relationship with his father and the Black Breath of the N_azgûl (who had hunted F_aramir ever since he had left I_thilien), all contributed to his near-death. After the battle, A_ragorn came and revived him with athelas. When he awoke, F_aramir immediately recognized A_ragorn as his rightful king.[5]

Before A_ragorn left to lead the soldiers to the B_lack Gate, he commanded the Warden of the H_ouses of Healing to have F_aramir and É_owyn to remain resting for at least ten days. After É_owyn demanded that the Warden take her to the Steward of the City to have her released so she could ride out in battle, F_aramir, whose heart was moved with pity and pierced by her beauty, told É_owyn that he too, had to heed the advice of the Warden. He fulfilled her request to have her room look east to M_ordor and asked her to talk with him at times.[5]

F_aramir and É_owyn walked together in the gardens nearly every day, and he learned from M_erry B_randybuck of É_owyn's despair of feeling trapped, waiting on the waning of T_héoden, and of A_ragorn's rejection of her love.[5]

On March 25, F_aramir gave É_owyn a dark blue mantle sewn with silver stars that had once belonged to his mother F_induilas, as they stood at the wall that looked towards M_ordor. There, they saw a threatening darkness towering over and seeing this, F_aramir told her of his dream of the Downfall of N_úmenor and that the darkness threatening to overtake M_iddle-earth reminded him of the great wave that swallowed the island. Somehow, to F_aramir and the people of the city, a hope and joy welled in their hearts and he kissed É_owyn’s brow. They were later informed by an eagle that S_auron had fallen for good, and that A_ragorn would return as king.[11]

É_owyn, however, still felt languished and unfulfilled. Several days after he gave her the mantle, F_aramir told her that he understood that she desired to be lifted in greatness and out of the cage she had felt trapped in, and when A_ragorn only gave her understanding and pity, instead of love, she had wanted to die valiantly and gloriously in battle. He told her that though he had first pitied her, he now loved her. There, É_owyn’s grief was fully healed, and no longer did she desire glory or greatness and realized that she had come to love F_aramir in return.[11]

F_aramir briefly served as the Ruling Steward of G_ondor, and began preparing the city for the King's arrival. On the day of the King’s official coronation on May 1, F_aramir surrendered his office, which was represented by the white rod of the Steward, kneeling as he did so. A_ragorn however, gave the rod back, announcing that as long as his line would last, F_aramir and his descendants would be Stewards of G_ondor. After F_aramir had asked the people of G_ondor if they accepted A_ragorn as their King (which they did), F_aramir took the Crown of G_ondor out and A_ragorn was crowned King E_lessar by G_andalf.
