The Fellowship of the R_ing: Being the First Part of The Lord of the R_ings is a novel written by J.R.R. T_olkien. It is divided into Book I and Book II. It was originally released on July 29, 1954 in the United Kingdom by Allen & Unwin. Its story is followed by The T_wo Towers and concluded by The R_eturn of the King.

Prologue
The book begins with a foreword and a prologue Concerning H_obbits, and Other Matters summarizing the events of The H_obbit. It gives the backstory of the One R_ing and how it came to be. It tells the backstory of S_méagol and his friend D_éagol, and how they came upon the R_ing after S_auron was temporarily defeated. It also explains how B_ilbo B_aggins found the R_ing once S_méagol (who had become G_ollum) had lost it. B_ilbo returns to B_ag End in the S_hire, and the story of F_rodo B_aggins, B_ilbo's nephew, begins.

The first sets the stage for the adventure and follows F_rodo B_aggins as he flees from his home in the S_hire to escape the minions of the Dark Lord S_auron. S_auron seeks the One R_ing that will allow him to control the Bearers of the nineteen other R_ings of Power and control the three major races of M_iddle-earth: Elves, Men, and Dwarves. The One R_ing has been inherited by F_rodo who finds himself unwittingly in the midst of a struggle for world domination.

The first chapter in the book begins quite lightly, following on from The H_obbit which is more of a whimsical children's story than The Lord of the R_ings. It begins with B_ilbo celebrating his 111th (or eleventy first) birthday, on the s_ame day that F_rodo celebrates his 33rd birthday (his 'coming of age'). At the birthday party, B_ilbo disappears after his speech, to the surprise of all. F_rodo later learns about the ring which he had used to make himself invisible, and also about some of its darker powers.

Heeding the advice of the wizard G_andalf, F_rodo leaves his home, taking the R_ing with him. He hopes to reach R_ivendell, where he will be safe from S_auron, and where those wiser than he can decide what to do about the R_ing.

In his journey he is accompanied by three H_obbit friends, P_eregrin T_ook, M_eriadoc B_randybuck and S_amwise G_amgee, often referred to as M_erry, P_ippin and S_am. From the start they are pursued by B_lack Riders, the R_ingwraiths who serve S_auron. Narrowly escaping these and other dangers and meeting other interesting characters en route (e.g., T_om B_ombadil) they eventually come to B_ree, where they meet S_trider, another friend of G_andalf who leads them the rest of the way to R_ivendell, through further hardships. F_rodo is stabbed upon the mountain of W_eathertop by the Lord of the N_azgûl with a M_orgul-knife - as part of the knife stays inside him, he gets sicker on the rest of the journey. They also pass the trolls which had been turned to stone in the previous book, The H_obbit.

Chapters
I - A Long-expected Party - details B_ilbo and F_rodo's Birthday Party; chapter ends with B_ilbo leaving the S_hire.
II - The Shadow of the Past - G_andalf tells F_rodo the true nature of the ring, and how it must be taken to M_ordor and destroyed. S_am, who has been listening at the window, is told to accompany F_rodo.
III - Three is Company - F_rodo sells Bag End, and officially is going to move to a house at C_rickhollow in the area beyond B_ucklebury in B_uckland; he actually plans to disappear without causing too much of a fuss. F_rodo, S_am and P_ippin set out through the South Farthing of the S_hire towards B_uckland, and encounter a black rider. They also meet G_ildor, a High-elf, with other High Elves.
IV - A Short Cut to Mushrooms - They meet F_armer Maggot while taking a short cut, and he gives them some of his prized mushrooms. M_erry joins them at the end.
V - A Conspiracy Unmasked - Takes place at F_rodo's new house at C_rickhollow. The title refers to F_rodo about to tell M_erry and P_ippin about his quest, who he had previously believed not to know about it, and they tell him that they had known much of it all along. They also meet F_redegar B_olger. F_rodo decides to leave the next day through the Old Forest, as it is an unexpected direction, rather than travelling on the roads.
VI - The Old Forest - Although trying to avoid it, the h_obbits get lost and travel to the River W_ithywindle, the "queerest part of the whole wood". M_erry and P_ippin are trapped inside Old Man Willow, and are freed only when T_om B_ombadil arrives.
VII - In the House of T_om B_ombadil - T_om knows much about the h_obbits, and even tries on the R_ing, yet it does not have any effect on him - it doesn't even make him invisible. F_rodo tries on the R_ing then to see if it 'works', and T_om B_ombadil is also able to see F_rodo while he has the R_ing on. They also meet T_om B_ombadil's wife Goldberry.
VIII - Fog on the B_arrow-downs - Traveling through the B_arrow-downs, the h_obbits are imprisoned by Barrow-wights, where they are rescued again by T_om B_ombadil. The h_obbits are given daggers from the treasure in one of the barrows.
IX - At the Sign of the P_rancing Pony - The h_obbits reach the The P_rancing Pony inn at B_ree, where F_rodo uses a false name, Underhill. Later, after singing a song on a table, he trips and accidentally puts the R_ing on his finger, disappearing, which causes a commotion.
X - S_trider - S_trider, who had at first seemed menacing, turns out to be friendly. The innkeeper, B_arliman B_utterbur, gives F_rodo a late letter from G_andalf, which tells him that S_trider is a friend of G_andalf's whose real name is A_ragorn.
XI - A Knife in the Dark - The h_obbits set out from B_ree with S_trider on foot after their horses had bolted when B_lack Riders arrived at the inn at night. The Riders had attacked the beds which they were supposed to be staying in, though in vain as S_trider had them stay in another room. They buy a pony from B_ill Ferny. They pass through the M_idgewater Marshes, and reach W_eathertop. There they are attacked by five B_lack Riders; F_rodo puts on the R_ing to escape them, and is stabbed in the shoulder by the W_itch-king of A_ngmar, leader of the nine N_azgûl.
XII - Flight to the Ford - They pass the trolls Tom, Bert, and William, which were turned to stone by G_andalf in The H_obbit. Eventually, they meet the Elf G_lorfindel from R_ivendell, who allows F_rodo to take his white horse A_sfaloth to escape the R_ingwraiths on their way to R_ivendell. The B_lack Riders are washed away in a flood over the Ford of B_ruinen.

Book II chronicles F_rodo's stay at R_ivendell, where a plan is hatched at the C_ouncil of E_lrond to destroy the R_ing in M_ordor. Early on F_rodo meets his uncle B_ilbo, whom he had not seen since he left H_obbiton seventeen years earlier. F_rodo sets forth from R_ivendell with nine companions: two Men, A_ragorn and B_oromir, son of the Steward of the land of G_ondor; an Elven prince, L_egolas; F_rodo's old friend and powerful wizard, G_andalf; G_imli the Dwarf; and F_rodo's original three H_obbit companions. These N_ine Walkers, the Fellowship of the R_ing, were chosen to represent the free races of M_iddle-earth and as a balance to the Nine Riders. They were also accompanied by B_ill the Pony, whom S_trider and the H_obbits acquired in B_ree as a pack horse. Their attempt to cross the M_isty Mountains is foiled by heavy snow, so they are forced to take a path under the mountains via M_oria, an ancient Dwarf kingdom, now full of Orcs and other evil creatures, such as the W_atcher in the Water guarding the west gate. Just before escaping M_oria, G_andalf falls into the abyss while battling a B_alrog.

The remaining eight members of the Fellowship then spend some time in the elf-haven of L_othlórien, where they receive gifts from the Elf-lady G_aladriel that in many cases prove useful later in the quest. They leave L_órien by river, but F_rodo begins to realize the R_ing is having a malevolent effect on some members of the party, especially B_oromir, who tries to take the R_ing from F_rodo. In the process, F_rodo puts on the R_ing to escape him. Later B_oromir is attacked by Orcs while trying to defend M_erry and P_ippin. This book ends when F_rodo and S_am depart secretly for M_ordor and the Fellowship of the R_ing dissolves.
