I_thilien
G_ollum led the two h_obbits to the B_lack Gate of M_ordor, as F_rodo had desired, but stopped the h_obbits from passing its doors, as the danger was too great. He then explained about a secret way into M_ordor, 'Up the stairs and through the tunnel'. The h_obbits once again found themselves being led by G_ollum. After venturing into I_thilien, and witnessing a skirmish between a company of Haradrim warriors (along with O_liphaunts) and Rangers from Gondor, they were apprehended by the Ranger's captain, F_aramir. When the skirmish had ended, F_aramir blindfolded the R_ing-bearer and his companions and led them to H_enneth Annûn, the Window on the West. Upon much interrogation, S_am foolishly misspoke, and gave away that F_rodo was indeed carrying the One R_ing. Realizing the importance of the quest, F_aramir proved his quality, unlike his brother, B_oromir, and let the R_ing-bearer go free, resupplying the h_obbits with food for their journey. Later, G_ollum was captured in the F_orbidden Pool and forcibly taken into the hidden lair. F_rodo begged for his safety, and he was not killed, although the rift between master and servant had once again begun to open.

M_inas M_orgul and S_helob's Lair
G_ollum led the h_obbits past the lair of the W_itch-king of A_ngmar, M_inas M_orgul, and up the Stairs of C_irith Ungol into 'The Tunnel'. When they arrived at the top though, they were abandoned by G_ollum, causing them to realize that G_ollum had betrayed them. They cautiously traveled through the tunnel, and managed to get to the end only to find their way barred by S_helob's great web. Whilst attempting to cut through the webbing, F_rodo bravely stood up to S_helob and forced her back further into the tunnels giving him and S_am time enough to hack through the threads and escape. Upon escaping the tunnels, F_rodo thought himself safe; however, S_helob, through one of her many tunnels, managed to sneak out and jab him with her stinger. As he was being encased in S_helob's webbing, S_am was able to draw her into single combat wherein he, using S_ting and the Phial of G_aladriel, was able to mortally wound her and drive her back into her caves. S_am took the R_ing from around F_rodo's neck upon hearing Orcish voices, and hid behind some nearby rocks. He overheard the Orcs speaking of F_rodo, and S_am realized that his master was not dead, but merely paralyzed. F_rodo was then taken to the Tower of C_irith Ungol to await further torture and questioning.

C_irith Ungol
F_rodo was imprisoned on the highest floor of the Tower. He was stripped of all his clothes and possessions. Fighting broke out amongst the two lead Orcs and their battalions from squabbling over claim of the m_ithril vest - in this violence almost all Orcs and U_ruks in the tower died. S_am soon arrived at the gate of the Tower, only to find his way blocked by the Two W_atchers; he eventually overcame them, entered the tower, finding and rescuing his master. They descended and fled the tower, having to pass the W_atchers again (this time, destroying them), and entered M_ordor.

M_ordor and M_ount Doom
F_rodo and S_am crawled onward through the plains of M_ordor, which lay vacant as many hosts of Orcs were sent to the B_lack Gate to meet the Men of the West's army, and, after falling in and out of one such company of Orcs, started to climb M_ount Doom. They journeyed on for days with little food or water, and F_rodo became progressively weaker as the R_ing's power over him grew the closer they drew to O_rodruin. F_rodo was eventually unable to go on, and S_am was forced to carry him a fair distance. It was then that G_ollum reappeared, and, after a brief struggle, S_am cut G_ollum in the stomach while F_rodo fled up the mountain to its entrance.

Inside the C_racks of Doom, F_rodo finally had the chance to destroy the R_ing and relieve his burden, but the R_ing's power was at its strongest due to the surroundings where it had been created. F_rodo finally yielded to the temptation and power of the R_ing. S_am yelled for F_rodo to destroy it, but F_rodo, overcome by its power, claimed the R_ing for himself aloud. G_ollum attacked S_am, who fell and hit his head on a rock, temporarily knocking him unconscious. When he regained consciousness, he saw G_ollum fighting with an invisible F_rodo. G_ollum bit off F_rodo's finger that wore the R_ing, causing F_rodo great pain, and he was reunited with his treasure for a short time, until, dancing with joy, he toppled off the brink and fell into the lava, destroying himself and the One R_ing.

The two h_obbits tried to escape as M_ount Doom erupted. In the very moment that they believed themselves doomed, G_waihir the Lord of E_agles saw them, and, with his E_agle companions L_androval and M_eneldor, rescued S_am and F_rodo, and flew them westward, out of M_ordor to safety.
