S_trider
In B_ree, the h_obbits stayed at The P_rancing Pony, an old inn. F_rodo went by the name of Mr U_nderhill, attempting to raise as little suspicion as possible. When he noticed a mysteriously cloaked Man sitting in the shadows and smoking a long-stemmed pipe, F_rodo asked the innkeeper, B_arliman B_utterbur, who the man was. The innkeeper referred to the man, a Ranger, as S_trider.

That night, B_lack Riders arrived in B_ree and attacked the inn in search of F_rodo and the One R_ing, but S_trider had managed to hide the h_obbits from them in time. Having gained their trust, S_trider introduced himself as A_ragorn to F_rodo and the others, to whom he also revealed the backstory of the black riders, also called N_azgûl or R_ingwraiths. With a pony named Bill that the h_obbits had acquired at B_ree, S_trider led F_rodo and his companions into the Wild. A_ragorn would be their guide to R_ivendell, and he would lead them through the M_idgewater Marshes and to the hill of W_eathertop.

W_eathertop
On the night of October the sixth, the h_obbits were attacked by five of the nine R_ingwraiths at W_eathertop. In the presence of the N_azgûl, F_rodo made the mistake of putting on the R_ing. He was able to resist their attempt to take him by drawing his sword and invoking the name of one of the V_alar, E_lbereth G_ilthoniel. Unfortunately, the leader of the N_azgûl, the W_itch-king of A_ngmar, stabbed F_rodo in the shoulder (he would have stabbed his heart) with a M_orgul-knife. If it had caught him in the heart, F_rodo would have become like the N_azgûl, only weaker and under their control. the R_ingwraiths were driven away by the appearance of A_ragorn and his martial skill; also because he had torches, one of their few weaknesses.

Though A_ragorn was a skilled healer, he could not heal F_rodo's wound. A fragment of the R_ingwraith's blade remained in F_rodo's flesh, where it continued to move towards his heart. Near death (or worse), F_rodo was rescued by G_lorfindel, an E_lf-lord, who put the injured h_obbit upon his horse A_sfaloth. They were found and pursued by the N_azgûl, as G_lorfindel rode and bore F_rodo swiftly to the Ford of B_ruinen, at the entrance to the valley of R_ivendell. Once they had crossed the River B_ruinen, the Nine R_ingwraiths behind them demanded F_rodo give up the R_ing, but F_rodo refused. Subsequently, the R_ingwraiths entered the river and were washed away in a flood called up by E_lrond.

F_rodo was soon healed in R_ivendell by E_lrond, who knew the wound would not ultimately leave him, as it was both spiritual and physical. On the 24th of October 3018, F_rodo awoke in R_ivendell and was reunited with B_ilbo, G_andalf, A_ragorn, S_am, M_erry, and P_ippin. Although E_lrond had healed his wound, it continued to ail him yearly for as long as he lived in M_iddle-earth.
