End of the War
The Scouring of the S_hire
After recovering at the Field of C_ormallen and witnessing the crowning of A_ragorn as King E_lessar, F_rodo, S_am, M_erry, and P_ippin all returned to the S_hire. Arriving, they found it under the control of one S_harkey (later revealed to be S_aruman) and his forces. S_aruman was ruling the S_hire from B_ag End, although he was later murdered by G_ríma W_ormtongue. F_rodo, S_am, M_erry, and P_ippin, however, started to gather all Shirriffs and townsfolk of the S_hire, and they successfully defeated of S_aruman's R_uffians at the Battle of B_ywater.

F_rodo was not directly involved in the fighting at the Battle of B_ywater; instead, he made sure that no h_obbits were harmed (saying that no h_obbit had ever intentionally harmed another in the S_hire, and that this would stay true), and also that any R_uffians that surrendered were not harmed.

Close of the T_hird Age
Following the Scouring of the S_hire and end of the War of the R_ing in November, F_rodo went on to serve as Deputy Mayor of the S_hire. During his brief tenure of six months, he helped lead the rebuilding of the S_hire, but soon realized that he still bore the wounds of his quest. On May 1st, T_A 3020, F_rodo attended the wedding of his best friend S_am and his wife R_osie C_otton and they moved in with him at B_ag End. On mid-years day later that year, F_rodo retired from his post as Deputy Mayor, letting the office revert to W_ill Whitfoot, who F_rodo held place for as he recovered from his wounds and imprisonment by S_aruman.

During his last days in m_iddle-earth, he tried to live as peacefully as possible. F_rodo was still troubled by his shoulder wound, which pained him on each anniversary of the attack at W_eathertop, in addition to falling sick on each anniversary of being stung by S_helob. As such, October 6th of that year, he would suffer from his wounds again. March 13th, T_A 3021 brought similar ailments, F_rodo being ill from his stinging. While living with S_am and R_osie he would witness the birth of their oldest daughter E_lanor twelve days later. Prior to departing M_iddle-earth, he also wrote his own story "The Lord of the R_ings" along with B_ilbo's "T_here and Back Again" in the R_ed Book of Westmarch.

On September 22, T_A 3021 (T_hird Age), at the age of 53, F_rodo joined B_ilbo, G_andalf, E_lrond, and G_aladriel aboard the White Ship at the G_rey Havens. He was allowed passage across the sea to the U_ndying Lands, as he was a  R_ing-bearer, with the hope of healing the damage to his spirit that bearing the R_ing had caused.[3]
