Coming of age & flight from the S_hire
After the party finished, F_rodo returned home and discovered that he was now the master of B_ag End and the recipient of B_ilbo's magic R_ing. G_andalf, ever more curious about the R_ing's origin, power, and purpose (but not yet positive it was the One R_ing), advised the young h_obbit against the using the R_ing. For the next seventeen years, F_rodo complied with the wizard's request and hid the R_ing in a safe place. However, on April 12, 3018, G_andalf returned to B_ag End and warned F_rodo that the R_ing was actually the One R_ing, which the Dark Lord S_auron needed to rule over M_iddle-earth. Realizing that S_auron would be looking for the R_ing, G_andalf advised the h_obbit to secretly follow B_ilbo's journey to R_ivendell.

After F_rodo's discussion with G_andalf, a rumor started that he was running out of money. This rumor, though not begun by F_rodo, was encouraged by him. M_erry helped F_rodo to purchase a small house at C_rickhollow. With the exception of his gardener S_am G_amgee, who had agreed to accompany him to R_ivendell, F_rodo told the other h_obbits of the S_hire that he intended to move to B_uckland. He sold his home to the S_ackville-B_agginses, and, on the September 23, 3018, the day after his fiftieth birthday, F_rodo left from B_ag End, taking with him S_am and P_ippin. They left in the early morning for B_ree, and just in time, as S_auron's most powerful servants, the nine N_azgûl, had entered the S_hire dressed as B_lack Riders searching for a h_obbit with the name of B_aggins.

To B_ree
F_rodo was nearly captured by a B_lack Rider on the road, but was saved by G_ildor I_nglorion of the House of F_inrod, whom he asked for advice. Leaving the roads to cut across country, F_rodo and S_am reached F_armer Maggot's farm, who helped them to evade the Riders. Meeting M_erry at B_ucklebury Ferry, they saw a Rider tracking them from the bank they'd departed from. On arrival at C_rickhollow, F_rodo found that M_erry and P_ippin already knew about his "secret" journey. F_rodo was left with no alternative but to bring the two youngsters with him. They cut through the Old Forest and the B_arrow-downs in hopes of losing the B_lack Riders, which did succeed. They met other troubles in those places though, at the hands of Old Man Willow and the B_arrow-wights, but were rescued twice by T_om B_ombadil, a mysterious being who dwelt in a glade in the middle of the Old Forest.
