W_ar of the R_ing
G_aladriel and C_eleborn were well informed about the Company of the R_ing, its members, and their mission, before its coming to L_othlórien, perhaps informed by messages from R_ivendell.[39] In the evening of January 17 in the year 3019, the Company arrived at C_aras G_aladhon.[40] Coming to the talan of the Lady and Lord, each member was greeted by name by C_eleborn. Noticing that G_andalf was missing, G_aladriel asked where he was, for she wished to speak with him. Hearing that they had encountered D_urin's Bane and that this was in fact a B_alrog from ancient times, C_eleborn criticized the passing of the Company through M_oria. However, G_aladriel was more sympathetic, especially towards G_imli, who bowed to her in respect. Before inviting the members of the Company to rest and heal there, she looked deep into their eyes and they all felt their hearts exposed.[9]

A month later, on February 15,[40] F_rodo B_aggins the bearer of the One R_ing, was walking in the evening with S_amwise G_amgee when they encountered G_aladriel. She led them to an enclosed garden and showed them a silver basin. Filling it with water, a mirror was formed, which allowed them to see things that were and that might come. F_rodo saw the Eye of S_auron, and she explained that she knew F_rodo's mind well, for S_auron also tried to look into hers. She also kept a R_ing of Power. Showing him N_enya, the R_ing of AdA_mant, she explained that its power would disappear once F_rodo destroyed the One, and L_órien would fade. When F_rodo offered the One R_ing to her, she laughed in response, saying that she "greatly desired" it. However, she then began to ponder how powerful she would become with the R_ing's power, and as a result, a great light from N_enya covered her overwhelming height. After the light faded and she laughed again, she told F_rodo that she had passed "the test" and that she would "diminish…into the West".[9] Indeed, with this rejection of temptation and her long opposition against S_auron, the ban upon her return to A_man was finally lifted.[16]

That night, the Lord and Lady summoned the Company and spoke of their departure, which was appointed for the following morning. The next day, she sent the Fellowship off on their Quest, furnished with gifts for all the members, including l_embas and E_lven-cloaks. Later, a farewell party was held, which the Lord and Lady attended in a swan boat; from it, G_aladriel sang a song about E_ldamar. After everyone ate and drank, she proceed to give specific gifts to each member.[41]

Among the gifts was the E_lfstone, which she gave to A_ragorn from A_rwen "as a token of hope".[41] The j_ewel was also in part a bridal gift and a token of the future wedding of A_rwen and A_ragorn, done following the N_oldorin custom in which the bride's mother should give to the bridegroom a j_ewel. Since A_rwen's mother C_elebrían had departed long ago, G_aladriel did it in her place.[42] When G_aladriel stated that she was unsure as to what to give to G_imli, she asked what he wanted. After complimenting her beauty due to being touched by her nobility and beauty, he asked for a single strand of her hair. Instead, she generously gifted him three strands, which he promised to put into an imperishable crystal to be an heirloom of his house in memory of her. Apart from the strands of hair given to G_imli and the E_lfstone to A_ragorn, she gave a M_allorn seed and a small box of earth from her garden to S_amwise G_amgee and a belt each to B_oromir, M_eriadoc B_randybuck, and P_eregrin T_ook. To L_egolas she gave a long, stout bow of the G_aladhrim. And last, to F_rodo, she gave a a small crystal phial specially prepared by her, which contained the light of G_il-Orestel. As the Fellowship departed, the Company saw her one last time while sailing down to the A_nduin: a shining figure, all clad in white, raising her arms, and F_rodo was able to hear her clearly reciting a long poem in Elvish despite the distance.[41]

The following day, a resurrected G_andalf was brought the peak of C_elebdil to L_órien by G_waihir,[40] who was sent by G_aladriel. He was received in C_aras G_aladhon, and was healed and clothed in white. He also took and gave counsel. Before he left, G_aladriel gave him some prophetic messages for A_ragorn, L_egolas, and G_imli.[43]

The land of L_órien was not exempt from the battles of the W_ar of the R_ing: between March 11 and March 18, the G_aladhrim suffered three assaults from Dol G_uldur.[40] After the Downfall of B_arad-dûr, C_eleborn crossed the A_nduin with a host and began the destruction of Dol G_uldur.[44] Soon afterward, G_aladriel threw down the walls of the fortress and opened its pits.[40]
