Life in A_man
G_aladriel was born in E_ldamar in the year 1362 of the T_rees of the F_irst Age.[10] She was the fourth child of F_inarfin, prince of the Ñ_oldor, who named her A_rtanis.[11] Her mother was E_ärwen, princess of the F_almari, who named her N_erwen. G_aladriel grew beautiful and tall, even for the women of the Ñ_oldor. Being strong of body, will, and mind, she was "a match for both the loremasters and the athletes of the E_ldar in the days of their youth".[12]

Indeed, "she was then of A_mazon disposition and bound up her hair as a crown when taking part in athletic feats". This custom was the origin of her S_indarin name G_aladriel,[13] which was given to, and accepted by, her much later in B_eleriand.[14] The gleaming of her hair was not a mere poetic reference: her hair was held to be an unmatched marvel. It mingled and surpassed the gold hair of her father and the starlike silver of her mother, so the E_ldar said that both lights of the Two T_rees of V_alinor were captured in her tresses. It was also said that this first gave the idea to her uncle F_ëanor of capturing the merged light of the T_rees, which would result in the making of the S_ilmarils. He once asked her three times for one of her tresses, but she always refused. F_ëanor and G_aladriel were always unfriends, both being the greatest E_ldar in V_alinor; and if F_ëanor was greater than she, she was wiser, and her wisdom grew with the long years. For she also had an outstanding gift to see into the minds of others, and, though she judged most with kindness, she hated and feared the darkness in F_ëanor, not perceiving that the shadow of the same evil had fallen upon the minds of all the Ñ_oldor, including her own.[12]

There was still bliss in V_alinor when she was born, but soon she was influenced by the unrest of the Ñ_oldor and afterwards lost her inner peace. She was proud, like most of the House of F_inwë, and like her closest brother F_inrod, "she had dreams of far lands and dominions that might be her own to order as she would without tutelage". But deep in herself, she had the noble spirit of the Vanyar, which did not allow her to forget the reverence for the V_alar.[12]

During the rebellion of F_ëanor and the beginning of the Long Night, G_aladriel was the only woman of the Ñ_oldor who stood among the rising princes. Though she swore no oath, the words of F_ëanor concerning M_iddle-earth still kindled a desire in her heart, as she was eager to see those wide unguarded lands and rule a realm of her own.[15] Like the rest of the House of F_inarfin, she was also supportive of the Exile by the desire to aid their S_indarin relatives in M_iddle-earth.[12]

Even though she was one of the leaders in this revolt,[16] during the troubles that followed she fought fiercely against F_ëanor by defending her mother's kin during the Kinslaying at A_lqualondë and the rape of the ships. Afterwards, she even desired to follow F_ëanor to disturb him in all the ways that she could, but nothing could have moved her to return since she had begun her way to exile, as her pride was strong then as it was thereafter.[12] She kept moving forward even under the D_oom of Mandos, when her father F_inarfin abandoned the march and returned to V_alinor, and even when F_ëanor left behind the hosts of F_ingolfin and the children of F_inarfin. Then she, along with F_inrod and F_ingolfin and his sons, led her people far into the bitter North and crossed the terrors of the H_elcaraxë. After many losses, they arrived on the northern shores of the Outer Lands.[15]
