
Arrival to M_iddle-earth
Once in B_eleriand, those of the House of F_inarfin were eager to enter M_enegroth in D_oriath, but K_ing Elu T_hingol received the Ñ_oldor coldly, and only allowed entrance to those invited by him after some inquiries.[17] Finally in the year 52 of the F_irst Age,[18] F_inrod and G_aladriel became long guests in D_oriath, but her brother eventually departed to the caverns of N_arog to establish the stronghold of N_argothrond. G_aladriel did not go with him, and remained in D_oriath with C_eleborn, a kinsman of T_hingol, as there was great love between them.[19] Despite their love, they did not marry each other, following the custom among the E_ldar of avoiding marriage and child-bearing during the war,[20] but they were eventually betrothed till the war ended.[21] Meanwhile, she dwelt with Queen M_elian, from whom she learned much of the wisdom of M_iddle-earth.[17]

The Western Corn necessary to make l_embas had been lost in B_eleriand until the Ñ_oldor brought new grain back, and it flourished by the grace of the V_alar. G_aladriel was one of the main inheritors of it and of the art of the making of l_embas.[22] It is safe to assume M_elian benefited from this.

Years passed in D_oriath, and G_aladriel became dear to M_elian, and they spoke often to one another about V_alinor. M_elian was eager to learn the causes of the Exile of the Ñ_oldor, but G_aladriel would tell her nothing of what occurred after the death of the T_rees. In the year 66,[23] M_elian asked her directly about this, and G_aladriel revealed the story of the S_ilmarils and how the Ñ_oldor fled from A_man against the will of the V_alar, though she still left out the Oath of F_ëanor, the Kinslaying, and the burning of the T_elerian ships at L_osgar. M_elian was able to discern a darkness that was left unsaid, but G_aladriel refused to tell her more. Thus, T_hingol became concerned regarding the Ñ_oldor, and he was informed soon afterwards of the Ñ_oldor's dark deeds in A_man, and it chanced that the children of F_inarfin were visiting G_aladriel in D_oriath. Egged on by his accusing words, A_ngrod told him everything, and G_aladriel's brothers departed heavy-hearted.[19]

Despite all this, G_aladriel stayed in D_oriath until the year 102,[24] when the kingdom of N_argothrond was finished and a feast was held for all the children of F_inarfin. She dwelt there for a while. During this time, she asked F_inrod why he remained unmarried. Her brother answered with dark foresight about his kingdom.[19] Back in D_oriath, in the year 420,[25] G_aladriel heard another foretelling, as M_elian told her about a Man who shall cross into D_oriath moved by a doom greater than the Girdle of M_elian.[26]

G_aladriel did not have any significant role in the general course of events in the War of the G_reat j_ewels, but she might have been well informed of the deaths of her brothers A_ngrod and A_egnor during the D_agor Bragollach; and of F_inrod's, while he was held in captivity by S_auron in the year 465.[27] At some point before the Fall of N_argothrond in the year 495,[28] she and C_eleborn passed over the mountains[9] to E_riador, far from the turmoil of the last years of the F_irst Age.

After the W_ar of Wrath at the end of the F_irst Age, E_önwë, herald of M_anwë, summoned the Elves of B_eleriand to the West, so they were received in T_ol E_ressëa and under the pardon of the V_alar. However, some did not wish to leave M_iddle-earth, such as C_eleborn.[29] Being one of the chief leaders of the Ñ_oldorin rebellion, G_aladriel was not allowed to return[30] and a ban was set upon her, to which she replied that she had no wish to do so.[16] The same pride that led her out of A_man still moved her, and she rejected the pardon of the V_alar,[12] for as she had once lived in A_man itself, E_ressëa seemed only a "second best". She was also moved by love for C_eleborn, to whom she probably married around this time.[20]
