G_aladriel was the Ñ_oldorin Lady of the woods of L_othlórien who witnessed M_iddle-earth during the three Ages of Awakening.

G_aladriel was born in A_man as one of the Ñ_oldor. She was the daughter of F_inarfin and E_ärwen, and younger sister of F_inrod, A_ngrod, and A_egnor.[5] She took part in the Exile of the Ñ_oldor, following F_ëanor in his rebellion. However, she opposed the Kinslaying at A_lqualondë and crossed the H_elcaraxë with the rest of F_ingolfin's followers. After arriving in B_eleriand, she lived mainly in D_oriath, where she befriended M_elian. Later, with her husband C_eleborn, she ruled over the woodland Elves of L_othlórien, and together they had a daughter, C_elebrían, who married E_lrond.

She is described as "the mightiest and fairest of all the Elves that remained in M_iddle-earth",[6] and the "greatest of Elven women".[7] Throughout the T_hird Age it was unknown who wielded the Three R_ings,[8] but during the W_ar of the R_ing, G_aladriel revealed to F_rodo B_aggins that she was the bearer of N_enya.[9] After the War, she returned to the U_ttermost West.

Elder Days
Life in A_man
G_aladriel was born in E_ldamar in the year 1362 of the T_rees of the F_irst Age.[10] She was the fourth child of F_inarfin, prince of the Ñ_oldor, who named her A_rtanis.[11] Her mother was E_ärwen, princess of the F_almari, who named her N_erwen. G_aladriel grew beautiful and tall, even for the women of the Ñ_oldor. Being strong of body, will, and mind, she was "a match for both the loremasters and the athletes of the E_ldar in the days of their youth".[12]

Indeed, "she was then of A_mazon disposition and bound up her hair as a crown when taking part in athletic feats". This custom was the origin of her S_indarin name G_aladriel,[13] which was given to, and accepted by, her much later in B_eleriand.[14] The gleaming of her hair was not a mere poetic reference: her hair was held to be an unmatched marvel. It mingled and surpassed the gold hair of her father and the starlike silver of her mother, so the E_ldar said that both lights of the Two T_rees of V_alinor were captured in her tresses. It was also said that this first gave the idea to her uncle F_ëanor of capturing the merged light of the T_rees, which would result in the making of the S_ilmarils. He once asked her three times for one of her tresses, but she always refused. F_ëanor and G_aladriel were always unfriends, both being the greatest E_ldar in V_alinor; and if F_ëanor was greater than she, she was wiser, and her wisdom grew with the long years. For she also had an outstanding gift to see into the minds of others, and, though she judged most with kindness, she hated and feared the darkness in F_ëanor, not perceiving that the shadow of the same evil had fallen upon the minds of all the Ñ_oldor, including her own.[12]

There was still bliss in V_alinor when she was born, but soon she was influenced by the unrest of the Ñ_oldor and afterwards lost her inner peace. She was proud, like most of the House of F_inwë, and like her closest brother F_inrod, "she had dreams of far lands and dominions that might be her own to order as she would without tutelage". But deep in herself, she had the noble spirit of the Vanyar, which did not allow her to forget the reverence for the V_alar.[12]

During the rebellion of F_ëanor and the beginning of the Long Night, G_aladriel was the only woman of the Ñ_oldor who stood among the rising princes. Though she swore no oath, the words of F_ëanor concerning M_iddle-earth still kindled a desire in her heart, as she was eager to see those wide unguarded lands and rule a realm of her own.[15] Like the rest of the House of F_inarfin, she was also supportive of the Exile by the desire to aid their S_indarin relatives in M_iddle-earth.[12]

Even though she was one of the leaders in this revolt,[16] during the troubles that followed she fought fiercely against F_ëanor by defending her mother's kin during the Kinslaying at A_lqualondë and the rape of the ships. Afterwards, she even desired to follow F_ëanor to disturb him in all the ways that she could, but nothing could have moved her to return since she had begun her way to exile, as her pride was strong then as it was thereafter.[12] She kept moving forward even under the D_oom of Mandos, when her father F_inarfin abandoned the march and returned to V_alinor, and even when F_ëanor left behind the hosts of F_ingolfin and the children of F_inarfin. Then she, along with F_inrod and F_ingolfin and his sons, led her people far into the bitter North and crossed the terrors of the H_elcaraxë. After many losses, they arrived on the northern shores of the Outer Lands.[15]

Arrival to M_iddle-earth
Once in B_eleriand, those of the House of F_inarfin were eager to enter M_enegroth in D_oriath, but K_ing Elu T_hingol received the Ñ_oldor coldly, and only allowed entrance to those invited by him after some inquiries.[17] Finally in the year 52 of the F_irst Age,[18] F_inrod and G_aladriel became long guests in D_oriath, but her brother eventually departed to the caverns of N_arog to establish the stronghold of N_argothrond. G_aladriel did not go with him, and remained in D_oriath with C_eleborn, a kinsman of T_hingol, as there was great love between them.[19] Despite their love, they did not marry each other, following the custom among the E_ldar of avoiding marriage and child-bearing during the war,[20] but they were eventually betrothed till the war ended.[21] Meanwhile, she dwelt with Queen M_elian, from whom she learned much of the wisdom of M_iddle-earth.[17]

The Western Corn necessary to make l_embas had been lost in B_eleriand until the Ñ_oldor brought new grain back, and it flourished by the grace of the V_alar. G_aladriel was one of the main inheritors of it and of the art of the making of l_embas.[22] It is safe to assume M_elian benefited from this.

Years passed in D_oriath, and G_aladriel became dear to M_elian, and they spoke often to one another about V_alinor. M_elian was eager to learn the causes of the Exile of the Ñ_oldor, but G_aladriel would tell her nothing of what occurred after the death of the T_rees. In the year 66,[23] M_elian asked her directly about this, and G_aladriel revealed the story of the S_ilmarils and how the Ñ_oldor fled from A_man against the will of the V_alar, though she still left out the Oath of F_ëanor, the Kinslaying, and the burning of the T_elerian ships at L_osgar. M_elian was able to discern a darkness that was left unsaid, but G_aladriel refused to tell her more. Thus, T_hingol became concerned regarding the Ñ_oldor, and he was informed soon afterwards of the Ñ_oldor's dark deeds in A_man, and it chanced that the children of F_inarfin were visiting G_aladriel in D_oriath. Egged on by his accusing words, A_ngrod told him everything, and G_aladriel's brothers departed heavy-hearted.[19]

Despite all this, G_aladriel stayed in D_oriath until the year 102,[24] when the kingdom of N_argothrond was finished and a feast was held for all the children of F_inarfin. She dwelt there for a while. During this time, she asked F_inrod why he remained unmarried. Her brother answered with dark foresight about his kingdom.[19] Back in D_oriath, in the year 420,[25] G_aladriel heard another foretelling, as M_elian told her about a Man who shall cross into D_oriath moved by a doom greater than the Girdle of M_elian.[26]

G_aladriel did not have any significant role in the general course of events in the War of the G_reat j_ewels, but she might have been well informed of the deaths of her brothers A_ngrod and A_egnor during the D_agor Bragollach; and of F_inrod's, while he was held in captivity by S_auron in the year 465.[27] At some point before the Fall of N_argothrond in the year 495,[28] she and C_eleborn passed over the mountains[9] to E_riador, far from the turmoil of the last years of the F_irst Age.

After the W_ar of Wrath at the end of the F_irst Age, E_önwë, herald of M_anwë, summoned the Elves of B_eleriand to the West, so they were received in T_ol E_ressëa and under the pardon of the V_alar. However, some did not wish to leave M_iddle-earth, such as C_eleborn.[29] Being one of the chief leaders of the Ñ_oldorin rebellion, G_aladriel was not allowed to return[30] and a ban was set upon her, to which she replied that she had no wish to do so.[16] The same pride that led her out of A_man still moved her, and she rejected the pardon of the V_alar,[12] for as she had once lived in A_man itself, E_ressëa seemed only a "second best". She was also moved by love for C_eleborn, to whom she probably married around this time.[20]

S_econd Age
At the beginning of the S_econd Age, C_eleborn and G_aladriel dwelt for a time in L_indon, south of the Lune, while G_il-galad ruled in the north.[7] Both left L_indon before the years 10-20, when G_il-galad became king in that land, apparently thanks to her influence.[31] They entered E_riador and dwelt for a while around Lake Nenuial, being followed by many Ñ_oldor, S_indar, and L_aegil. They were considered to be the Lord and Lady of the E_ldar in E_riador.[32] Probably around the year 300, G_aladriel and C_eleborn had a daughter: C_elebrían.[20]

Around the year 500, S_auron began to stir in M_iddle-earth again,[7] but his name was not known. He was, however, perceived by G_aladriel, who noticed there was a controlling evil, and that it was spreading above the world, coming from the East beyond the M_isty Mountains. She also thought that this "residue of evil" could only be fought with an alliance of all its enemies. Therefore, she and C_eleborn moved eastwards and established in the realm of E_region near K_hazad-dûm. C_eleborn was not fond of Dwarves, but G_aladriel saw the importance of getting close to them, for she saw military interests even with them. Also, she was a Ñoldo, and therefore close to them in mind and in the passion for crafts; and in V_alinor she had learned from Y_avanna and A_ulë, the creator of the Dwarves himself.[32]

Some Ñ_oldor were also interested in establishing a realm near K_hazad-dûm because they knew m_ithril had been discovered there. Therefore, many E_lven-smiths came to E_region and created good relations with the Dwarves. C_elebrimbor, a descendant of F_ëanor, was the greatest of these craft-men and thus became the Lord of E_region.[7] In 750, he was the main builder in the early construction of O_st-in-Edhil. The power of G_aladriel and C_eleborn also grew: thanks to the Dwarves of K_hazad-dûm, they had contact with the N_andorin realm of L_órinand on the other side of the M_isty Mountains. Thanks to G_aladriel's influence upon L_órinand, S_auron's machinations in the Vales of A_nduin were fruitless.[32] G_aladriel also got in contact with N_úmenor, having a meeting with King A_ldarion when he came to the Bridge of T_harbad between the years 883-884.[33]

Around the year 1200, S_auron came in disguise to E_riador, but he was only welcomed in E_region by C_elebrimbor and the E_lven-smiths, who were interested in his advice on craftsmanship.[32] G_aladriel was not deceived, and rejected him, saying that he was not in the training of A_ulë as he claimed.[34] While S_auron realized this immediately, he desired "to placate her…with outward patience and courtesy" for some time. All the while, without G_aladriel's knowledge, S_auron influenced C_elebrimbor and the G_waith-i-Mírdain against G_aladriel and C_eleborn. Some time between the years 1350 and 1400, he moved them to expel G_aladriel from E_region in a coup. Thus, G_aladriel and C_elebrían left through K_hazad-dûm to L_órinand, although C_eleborn would not enter the Dwarvish realm and remained in E_region.[32]

When S_auron made the One R_ing in the year 1600, his treachery was discovered by C_elebrimbor.[7] The E_lven-smith came to L_órinand, seeking counsel from G_aladriel. They did not find the strength to destroy the R_ings of Power, but she advised him to hide the Three R_ings of the Elves where S_auron could not find them. Therefore he gave her N_enya, the White R_ing, while the other R_ings were given to other Elven lords.[32] This was done in the year 1693, the same year S_auron began the war against the Elves.[7]

With the invasion of E_riador, E_region was destroyed and C_elebrimbor was killed. Despite using torture, S_auron could not learn from him where the Elven R_ings were, although he suspected that they were kept by G_aladriel and G_il-galad.[32] Thanks to the military intervention of N_úmenor, however, S_auron was defeated in the year 1700.[7] Soon afterwards, G_aladriel was affected by the Unquiet of U_lmo[35] and she decided to leave L_órinand to dwell beside the sea.[32] As one of the High-elves, her yearning for the sea was unavoidable, and now she became burdened with the desire to cross to the Blessed Realm, but the ban upon her impeded it.[16] Thus she did not go to the sea yet, but crossed west of the mountains through K_hazad-dûm with C_elebrían. Seeking C_eleborn, they travelled to I_mladris, a refuge created by E_lrond during the war. Once there, a C_ouncil was held, in which it was decided that I_mladris would be the Elvish stronghold in the East, rather than the desolate E_region.[32]

G_aladriel, C_eleborn, and C_elebrían dwelt for a long time in I_mladris, but at some point they left and moved to B_elfalas near the sea at the place later known as Dol A_mroth. There were a few inhabitants there, but they were visited by N_andorin parties.[32] Apparently, they returned to L_órien twice before the Last Alliance and the end of the S_econd Age,[36] but their whereabouts during the final millennia of that Age is untold.

T_hird Age
Rule in L_órien
In the year 109 of the early T_hird Age, G_aladriel and C_eleborn's daughter C_elebrían wedded E_lrond the Half-elven.[8] The did not stay at first with her, however, for G_aladriel was filled with foreboding, and was concerned about the growing shadow in M_irkwood and Dol G_uldur. Therefore she and C_eleborn made long journeys investigating R_hovanion, going from G_ondor and the borders of M_ordor to T_hranduil in Northern M_irkwood. They also stayed a long time in L_órien with king A_mroth, for G_aladriel saw with her wisdom that this prosperous realm could be a stronghold against the growing Shadow, if it had better rule.[36] At this point, the Order of Wizards arrived in M_iddle-earth, and only G_aladriel, E_lrond, and C_írdan knew where they came from.[6] Around the year 1100, the Wise, including G_aladriel as one the chief E_ldar, were well aware of the evil dwelling in Dol G_uldur, but thought it was one of the Nazgûl.[8]

After their enquiries, G_aladriel and C_eleborn passed over the mountains to I_mladris, and there dwelt for many years with their kin.[36]

Between the years 1980 and 1981, a terror appeared in K_hazad-dûm and the Dwarves abandoned the realm, while the many S_ilvan Elves from L_órien had to flee south.[8] To make things worse, A_mroth was lost, leaving no heir, and the Elven realm was left without a ruler. Therefore C_eleborn and G_aladriel went there, welcomed by the people, and took up the rule jointly, but refused to take the royal title and were called the Lord and Lady of the G_aladhrim instead. Saving the realm from the perils of the moment, they dwelt and ruled permanently there.[36]

As the shadow of Dol G_uldur grew again, the W_hite C_ouncil was formed in the year 2463.[8] It was summoned by G_aladriel,[9] who, being a good friend of G_andalf, recommended that he be made head of the C_ouncil. But this distinction fell instead to S_aruman.[6]

In the year 2510, her daughter C_elebrían departed to the West after being wounded by Orcs.[8] That same year, she aided E_orl and his riders in the B_attle of the Field of Celebrant by creating a white mist that drove out the shadows from Dol G_uldur, unintentionally causing their descendants to regard her and the Golden Wood with fear.[37]

The W_hite C_ouncil would not take action until G_andalf discovered that the shadow growing in Dol G_uldur was S_auron. After deliberating, the C_ouncil joined forces and drove S_auron out of Dol G_uldur in the year 2941.[8]

Some years later, A_ragorn II entered L_othlórien after many travels, and was admitted by G_aladriel. She bade him to change his worn-out clothes and dressed him like a proper prince. During that time, A_ragorn became betrothed to her granddaughter A_rwen.[38]

W_ar of the R_ing

G_aladriel and C_eleborn were well informed about the Company of the R_ing, its members, and their mission, before its coming to L_othlórien, perhaps informed by messages from R_ivendell.[39] In the evening of January 17 in the year 3019, the Company arrived at Caras G_aladhon.[40] Coming to the talan of the Lady and Lord, each member was greeted by name by C_eleborn. Noticing that G_andalf was missing, G_aladriel asked where he was, for she wished to speak with him. Hearing that they had encountered D_urin's Bane and that this was in fact a B_alrog from ancient times, C_eleborn criticized the passing of the Company through M_oria. However, G_aladriel was more sympathetic, especially towards G_imli, who bowed to her in respect. Before inviting the members of the Company to rest and heal there, she looked deep into their eyes and they all felt their hearts exposed.[9]

A month later, on February 15,[40] F_rodo B_aggins the bearer of the One R_ing, was walking in the evening with S_amwise G_amgee when they encountered G_aladriel. She led them to an enclosed garden and showed them a silver basin. Filling it with water, a mirror was formed, which allowed them to see things that were and that might come. F_rodo saw the Eye of S_auron, and she explained that she knew F_rodo's mind well, for S_auron also tried to look into hers. She also kept a R_ing of Power. Showing him N_enya, the R_ing of AdA_mant, she explained that its power would disappear once F_rodo destroyed the One, and L_órien would fade. When F_rodo offered the One R_ing to her, she laughed in response, saying that she "greatly desired" it. However, she then began to ponder how powerful she would become with the R_ing's power, and as a result, a great light from N_enya covered her overwhelming height. After the light faded and she laughed again, she told F_rodo that she had passed "the test" and that she would "diminish…into the West".[9] Indeed, with this rejection of temptation and her long opposition against S_auron, the ban upon her return to A_man was finally lifted.[16]

That night, the Lord and Lady summoned the Company and spoke of their departure, which was appointed for the following morning. The next day, she sent the Fellowship off on their Quest, furnished with gifts for all the members, including l_embas and E_lven-cloaks. Later, a farewell party was held, which the Lord and Lady attended in a swan boat; from it, G_aladriel sang a song about E_ldamar. After everyone ate and drank, she proceed to give specific gifts to each member.[41]

Among the gifts was the E_lfstone, which she gave to A_ragorn from A_rwen "as a token of hope".[41] The j_ewel was also in part a bridal gift and a token of the future wedding of A_rwen and A_ragorn, done following the N_oldorin custom in which the bride's mother should give to the bridegroom a j_ewel. Since A_rwen's mother C_elebrían had departed long ago, G_aladriel did it in her place.[42] When G_aladriel stated that she was unsure as to what to give to G_imli, she asked what he wanted. After complimenting her beauty due to being touched by her nobility and beauty, he asked for a single strand of her hair. Instead, she generously gifted him three strands, which he promised to put into an imperishable crystal to be an heirloom of his house in memory of her. Apart from the strands of hair given to G_imli and the E_lfstone to A_ragorn, she gave a M_allorn seed and a small box of earth from her garden to S_amwise G_amgee and a belt each to B_oromir, M_eriadoc B_randybuck, and P_eregrin T_ook. To L_egolas she gave a long, stout bow of the G_aladhrim. And last, to F_rodo, she gave a a small crystal phial specially prepared by her, which contained the light of G_il-Orestel. As the Fellowship departed, the Company saw her one last time while sailing down to the A_nduin: a shining figure, all clad in white, raising her arms, and F_rodo was able to hear her clearly reciting a long poem in Elvish despite the distance.[41]

The following day, a resurrected G_andalf was brought the peak of C_elebdil to L_órien by G_waihir,[40] who was sent by G_aladriel. He was received in Caras G_aladhon, and was healed and clothed in white. He also took and gave counsel. Before he left, G_aladriel gave him some prophetic messages for A_ragorn, L_egolas, and G_imli.[43]

The land of L_órien was not exempt from the battles of the W_ar of the R_ing: between March 11 and March 18, the G_aladhrim suffered three assaults from Dol G_uldur.[40] After the Downfall of B_arad-dûr, C_eleborn crossed the A_nduin with a host and began the destruction of Dol G_uldur.[44] Soon afterward, G_aladriel threw down the walls of the fortress and opened its pits.[40]

Later history

G_aladriel, C_eleborn, and their company attended the wedding of A_ragorn and A_rwen in M_inas T_irith. Soon afterward they joined the crowded funeral riding of King T_héoden to R_ohan. After the funerals in the Golden Hall, they continued their travel northwards with other companions and halted in I_sengard. T_reebeard revealed that he had freed S_aruman, and regretted that he would not see G_aladriel and C_eleborn again. C_eleborn replied that he was unsure, but G_aladriel affirmed that it would be her last meeting with him, giving T_reebeard some cryptic words concerning A_rda E_nvinyanta[45]. They continued on their way and encountered S_aruman, who, released by T_reebeard, snapped that she had always hated him, and that he would find comfort now knowing that her realm was destroyed as well as his.[46]

Two years later, on September 22 of the year 3021,[44] F_rodo and S_am encountered a Wandering Company while traveling around The S_hire, and found that E_lrond, G_aladriel, and B_ilbo B_aggins were a part of it. N_enya was visible on G_aladriel's finger, and she seemed to shine like the moon. F_rodo decided to depart with them and the H_obbits joined the company led by E_lrond and G_aladriel.[47] On September 29, they reached M_ithlond and departed over the sea at the very end of the T_hird Age.[44]

Sometime later during the F_ourth Age, she received C_eleborn, her husband.[48] In the year 120,[49] it is said that G_imli sailed to the West alongside L_egolas out of his desire to see G_aladriel again. He may have been allowed thanks to her intervention.[50]
