S_econd Age
At the beginning of the S_econd Age, C_eleborn and G_aladriel dwelt for a time in L_indon, south of the Lune, while G_il-galad ruled in the north.[7] Both left L_indon before the years 10-20, when G_il-galad became king in that land, apparently thanks to her influence.[31] They entered E_riador and dwelt for a while around Lake Nenuial, being followed by many Ñ_oldor, S_indar, and L_aegil. They were considered to be the Lord and Lady of the E_ldar in E_riador.[32] Probably around the year 300, G_aladriel and C_eleborn had a daughter: C_elebrían.[20]

Around the year 500, S_auron began to stir in M_iddle-earth again,[7] but his name was not known. He was, however, perceived by G_aladriel, who noticed there was a controlling evil, and that it was spreading above the world, coming from the East beyond the M_isty Mountains. She also thought that this "residue of evil" could only be fought with an alliance of all its enemies. Therefore, she and C_eleborn moved eastwards and established in the realm of E_region near K_hazad-dûm. C_eleborn was not fond of Dwarves, but G_aladriel saw the importance of getting close to them, for she saw military interests even with them. Also, she was a Ñoldo, and therefore close to them in mind and in the passion for crafts; and in V_alinor she had learned from Y_avanna and A_ulë, the creator of the Dwarves himself.[32]

Some Ñ_oldor were also interested in establishing a realm near K_hazad-dûm because they knew m_ithril had been discovered there. Therefore, many E_lven-smiths came to E_region and created good relations with the Dwarves. C_elebrimbor, a descendant of F_ëanor, was the greatest of these craft-men and thus became the Lord of E_region.[7] In 750, he was the main builder in the early construction of O_st-in-Edhil. The power of G_aladriel and C_eleborn also grew: thanks to the Dwarves of K_hazad-dûm, they had contact with the N_andorin realm of L_órinand on the other side of the M_isty Mountains. Thanks to G_aladriel's influence upon L_órinand, S_auron's machinations in the Vales of A_nduin were fruitless.[32] G_aladriel also got in contact with N_úmenor, having a meeting with King A_ldarion when he came to the Bridge of T_harbad between the years 883-884.[33]

Around the year 1200, S_auron came in disguise to E_riador, but he was only welcomed in E_region by C_elebrimbor and the E_lven-smiths, who were interested in his advice on craftsmanship.[32] G_aladriel was not deceived, and rejected him, saying that he was not in the training of A_ulë as he claimed.[34] While S_auron realized this immediately, he desired "to placate her…with outward patience and courtesy" for some time. All the while, without G_aladriel's knowledge, S_auron influenced C_elebrimbor and the G_waith-i-Mírdain against G_aladriel and C_eleborn. Some time between the years 1350 and 1400, he moved them to expel G_aladriel from E_region in a coup. Thus, G_aladriel and C_elebrían left through K_hazad-dûm to L_órinand, although C_eleborn would not enter the Dwarvish realm and remained in E_region.[32]

When S_auron made the One R_ing in the year 1600, his treachery was discovered by C_elebrimbor.[7] The E_lven-smith came to L_órinand, seeking counsel from G_aladriel. They did not find the strength to destroy the R_ings of Power, but she advised him to hide the Three R_ings of the Elves where S_auron could not find them. Therefore he gave her N_enya, the White R_ing, while the other R_ings were given to other Elven lords.[32] This was done in the year 1693, the same year S_auron began the war against the Elves.[7]

With the invasion of E_riador, E_region was destroyed and C_elebrimbor was killed. Despite using torture, S_auron could not learn from him where the Elven R_ings were, although he suspected that they were kept by G_aladriel and G_il-galad.[32] Thanks to the military intervention of N_úmenor, however, S_auron was defeated in the year 1700.[7] Soon afterwards, G_aladriel was affected by the Unquiet of U_lmo[35] and she decided to leave L_órinand to dwell beside the sea.[32] As one of the High-elves, her yearning for the sea was unavoidable, and now she became burdened with the desire to cross to the Blessed Realm, but the ban upon her impeded it.[16] Thus she did not go to the sea yet, but crossed west of the mountains through K_hazad-dûm with C_elebrían. Seeking C_eleborn, they travelled to I_mladris, a refuge created by E_lrond during the war. Once there, a C_ouncil was held, in which it was decided that I_mladris would be the Elvish stronghold in the East, rather than the desolate E_region.[32]

G_aladriel, C_eleborn, and C_elebrían dwelt for a long time in I_mladris, but at some point they left and moved to B_elfalas near the sea at the place later known as Dol A_mroth. There were a few inhabitants there, but they were visited by N_andorin parties.[32] Apparently, they returned to L_órien twice before the Last Alliance and the end of the S_econd Age,[36] but their whereabouts during the final millennia of that Age is untold.
