Powers & abilities
G_andalf was one of the wisest and most knowledgeable beings in M_iddle-earth, believed by G_aladriel to be more worthy than S_aruman in leading the W_hite C_ouncil, though he was less mighty in magic, until his resurrection. He had extensive knowledge of many languages and writing systems used in M_iddle-earth, as well as in the history and customs of several of its peoples. He considered himself the greatest scholar of H_obbit traditions. His long journeys allowed him to meet many influential and powerful individuals and form lasting bonds with them. The H_obbits knew him as a masterful crafter of firecrackers.

Outside of the S_hire, however, G_andalf the Grey was revered as one of the most powerful and wisest beings to tread M_iddle-earth, although he was wary of confronting S_aruman and S_auron directly as G_andalf the Grey, and admitted the latter was still more powerful after his rebirth. He was considered the most powerful member of the Fellowship of the R_ing, as well as, according to A_ragorn, its leader, not in small part thanks to his encyclopedic knowledge. His great intelligence allowed him to accurately guess the thoughts of others and made him perhaps the preeminent architect of S_auron's defeat. Moreover, G_andalf was skilled at telling men things that were true from a certain point of view, such as when he scammed Háma into allowing him to bring his staff before the king.

Armed with an Elven blade, G_andalf was as valiant a fighter as the other swordsmen in the Fellowship, in no way hindered by his elderly appearance when fighting or riding. G_andalf reaped Orcs and other servants of evil with his blade, and slew the B_alrog in a duel, though he perished as well. He is rendered even more formidable by his magic. G_andalf killed a squad of G_oblins with lightning D_uring the quest to slay S_maug, then hurled lightning and fire at the N_azgûl when he was attacked on W_eathertop—something noticed for miles around and that seared the battlefield. G_andalf described himself as "a servant of the Secret Fire, wielder of the flame of A_nor". Coincidentally, many of his spells were based on light and fire. He was able to ignite some wet wood with a touch of his staff, which he considered distinctive enough that any onlooker would recognize his handiwork. G_andalf purged the room of the Great G_oblin with blue glowing smoke which scattered piercing white sparks to kill the Orcs. He could cause the tip of his staff to glow with bright white light so as to see in the dark and increase the radiance at will, as demonstrated in M_oria. G_andalf could conjure sparks, such as to light pinecones on fire, and could choose any color for his flames. When fighting a pack of wolves, he set fire to all treetops on a hill with a single blazing branch, and the air became so hot that an arrow burned mid-flight. At the cost of shattering his staff, he was able to conjure a sea of white flames that caused the bridge under the feet of D_urin's Bane to crumble.
