Conception of a plan
Over the years, G_andalf became concerned about the weak state of the North. S_maug the dragon had destroyed both the Kingdom under the Mountain and the town of D_ale, and the wizard feared that S_auron might use the desolation around E_rebor to regain the northern passes in the mountains and reclaim the old lands of A_ngmar. Worse still, G_andalf knew that it was only a matter of time before the Dark Lord regained enough power to exert influence over S_maug. With the dragon at his command, S_auron's victory would be all but assured.

G_andalf knew that exiled Dwarf King of D_urin's Folk, T_horin II, planned to battle against S_maug, but he knew that it would not be enough. In T_A 2941,[5] while staying the night in B_ree, G_andalf happened across the Dwarf King.[8] T_horin initiated conversation; he had been having a strange feeling urging him to seek G_andalf. The same was intrigued, for he had thought to seek T_horin as well. They found they were taking the same road for a while (T_horin passing through the S_hire on his way to the E_red Luin), and they agreed to travel together. T_horin wanted advice, and G_andalf in turn wanted to discuss the dragon S_maug with T_horin.

Ultimately, G_andalf concocted a plan wherein T_horin could destroy S_maug and recover his family fortune, albeit with a "burglar" of G_andalf's own choosing.

Leading the company

Feeling that a H_obbit should be involved, G_andalf remembered B_ilbo B_aggins. At first he found only H_olman C_otton as B_ilbo had left on the occasion of the Elven new year, something that persuaded G_andalf that B_ilbo was the right person for the job.[8] He visited B_ilbo later, bringing along the kinsmen of T_horin.[9] In the end, G_andalf convinced the reluctant B_aggins to become a burglar for T_horin. G_andalf then accompanied T_horin and Company to R_ivendell. D_uring the journey G_andalf was instrumental in saving the travellers' lives from several calamities. He saved them from a trio of Stone-T_rolls, and later obtained the legendary sword G_lamdring from their T_roll-hoard; G_andalf bore it thenceforth.[12]

He also helped T_horin and Company through the M_isty Mountains; when unknowingly they camped in the Front Porch of G_oblin-town, the Northern Orcs captured the whole company except G_andalf, who surprised them much later, killing the Great G_oblin and then leading the Dwarves to the G_oblin-gate.[13] It was D_uring this time that B_ilbo obtained a "magic r_ing".[14] B_ilbo initially claimed he "won" it from the creature "G_ollum" while the company was under the M_isty Mountains.[15] the R_ing conferred invisibility on B_ilbo when he wore it, and he kept it secret from G_andalf for some time.

On their escape out, the Company was saved by the E_agles of the M_isty Mountains; G_andalf once had healed the Lord of the E_agles from an arrow-wound, and thenceforth they became friends. The E_agles picked them up from the Great Shelf, and the next day they dropped them off on the C_arrock.[15]
