Fall in M_oria
At the Doors of D_urin on the west side of the mountains, G_andalf, after some delay, spoke the password and led the company into the dark. Having been in M_oria on an earlier perilous errand, he was somewhat familiar with the underground passages. Eventually the party came to the Chamber of Mazarbul, where G_andalf read the Book of Records, which revealed the fate of Balin, the leader of an ill-fated attempt to re-colonise M_oria. Soon after, the party was attacked by Orcs, and forced to flee the chamber. By then G_andalf was well aware of their location, and he led the party quickly towards the eastern exit.

Y_ou cannot pass," he said. The Orcs stood still, and a dead silence fell. "I_ am a servant of the Secret Fire, wielder of the flame of A_nor. Y_ou cannot pass. The dark fire will not avail you, flame of U_dûn. Go back to the Shadow! Y_ou cannot pass.
—The Lord of the R_ings, The Fellowship of the R_ing, Book II, Ch. 5: "The Bridge of K_hazad-dûm"

Unfortunately D_urin's Bane caught up to the group at the Bridge of K_hazad-dûm. G_andalf and L_egolas immediately realised what it was: a B_alrog of M_orgoth, a servant of the first Dark Lord. In a spectacular display of bravery, G_andalf faced the demon and broke the bridge both stood upon, leaving the beast to fall into a seemingly bottomless chasm. But the B_alrog's whip lashed out, and grasped G_andalf by the knees, causing him to fall into the pit. While falling, G_andalf shouted "Fly, you fools" and vanished into the abyss.[29]

Yet G_andalf did not die; he and the B_alrog fell for a long time, and the wizard was burned by the B_alrog's fire. Then they plunged into a deep lake in the depths of the mountain, which G_andalf later said was cold as the tide of death and almost froze his heart. They fought in the water until finally the B_alrog fled into dark tunnels, where the world was gnawed by nameless things, older even than S_auron. G_andalf pursued the creature until it led him to the spiralling Endless Stair, and they climbed it until they reached D_urin's Tower in the living rock of Z_irakzigil, the pinnacle of the Silvertine above the clouds. There they fought, until at last G_andalf threw down his enemy, and the B_alrog broke the mountain-side as it fell. Then darkness took G_andalf, and he passed away. His body lay on the peak. The entire battle, from the confrontation on the Bridge of K_hazad-dûm to the mutual demise of the B_alrog and G_andalf, had taken ten days.

Resurrection
Then darkness took me, and I strayed out of thought and time, and I wandered far on roads that I will not tell... Naked I was sent back – for a brief time, until my task is done. And naked I lay upon the mountain-top. … There I lay staring upward, while the stars wheeled over, and each day was as long as a life-age of the earth.
—The Lord of the R_ings, T_he Two Towers, Book Three, Ch. V: "The W_hite Rider"
