
Pressing business

G_andalf then sought the hospitality of B_eorn, persuading him to welcome and host the whole Company in his hall. But then he left the quest prior to its completion; after leading the Company to the outskirts of the Forest Gate, he gave them some final advice before they entered M_irkwood, and went to attend other obligations.[16][17] The W_hite C_ouncil had met under the gravest of circumstances: S_auron's power was returning, even without his R_ing. G_andalf at last convinced the C_ouncil to attack Dol G_uldur, to which even S_aruman agreed (as by now he feared S_auron as a rival, and wished to delay his search for the R_ing). G_andalf joined his peers in assailing Dol G_uldur, ridding M_irkwood of the N_ecromancer's presence, who fled to M_ordor to his long-prepared stronghold of B_arad-dûr.[18] When he was about to finish his task, news about what happened to T_horin's Company in M_irkwood reached him, and realized that the instructions he gave did not help them; they had lost their way, and then vanished due to the encounter with the Wood-elves, who had captured them. He was anxious to get back to them as soon as possible.[19]

The B_attle of Five Armies
Meanwhile T_horin's quest was successful: E_rebor was retaken and S_maug was killed,[20] but when G_andalf finally arrived to the area, he found the Dwarves of E_rebor and the I_ron Hills preparing for an attack by the L_ake-men and the Elves of M_irkwood. He was with Bard and T_hranduil and thus revealed his presence, trying to reason with T_horin. When the attack was beginning, G_andalf halted them, to warn that the Orcs and Wargs were coming to claim the treasure. He invited D_áin I_ronfoot for C_ouncil, and soon Dwarves, Elves and Men formed an alliance, and defeated the Orcs of the M_isty Mountains in the B_attle of Five Armies.[21]

King T_horin was mortally wounded and, after his funeral and the reestablishment of E_rebor under D_áin, B_ilbo and G_andalf followed their way back; they celebrated Yule at B_eorn's, and then returned to R_ivendell, where he discussed with E_lrond the events of Dol G_uldur and the L_onely Mountain. G_andalf had accomplished his immediate goal, which was to destroy S_maug, since he could have been used to disastrous effect by S_auron. A large number of Orcs and Wargs also were killed in the North, removing threats to R_ivendell and L_othlórien.[8] The two agreed that it would be better if the N_ecromancer were banished from the world altogether.[22]

As G_andalf and B_ilbo passed by the site of their former encounter with the stone-T_rolls, they made sure to recover the gold of the T_roll-hoard they had buried before the Wizard left to perform other duties and B_ilbo returned to the S_hire.[22] G_andalf, for his part, found himself amazed by the H_obbit; until then, the Wise had paid no attention to H_obbits and knew little of them. For the rest of his sojourn in M_iddle-earth, G_andalf took a special interest in H_obbits, and particularly in the B_aggins family.

Despite the C_ouncil's hopes, S_auron was not weakened by this attack. He had foreseen the move that drove him from M_irkwood, and his retreat was but a feint. Ten years after the attack, S_auron declared himself openly in M_ordor in 2951 and rebuilt his fortress of B_arad-dûr. The W_hite C_ouncil met for one last time in 2953 to debate the fate of the R_ings of Power. S_aruman quieted his peers claiming to have the knowledge that the One R_ing was lost in the Belegaer. After their meeting, S_aruman, jealous and afraid of G_andalf, set spies to watch all his movements; this would affect the peaceful H_obbits, as S_aruman thus discovered the existence and noted G_andalf's interest in the S_hire, and started sending agents to B_ree and the Southfarthing.[5]

In 2956, G_andalf met A_ragorn, the hidden Heir of I_sildur, and soon became friends with him. From that point on A_ragorn and G_andalf often worked together towards a common end - the defeat of S_auron.
