T_hird Age
Arrival in M_iddle-earth
O_lórin, like the other Wizards, took the shape of an old man. He was robed in grey and wandered about as a counsellor. At M_ithlond he was welcomed by G_lorfindel, his friend from V_alinor (who had been sent earlier on a similar mission), and C_írdan the shipwright who possessed N_arya, one of the Three E_lven R_ings of Power. C_írdan divined in O_lórin a sense of strength and power despite his appearance as a bent and aged man. C_írdan gave N_arya to O_lórin with a prediction of his future struggles with evil, and a promise that it would support and aid him in his labours.[5]

He then began his sojourn in M_iddle-earth and over many centuries, he walked among the Elves as a stranger, learning from them and teaching them. Unlike S_aruman, O_lórin never took up permanent residence, and never went to the east, apparently restricting his activities to the Westlands of M_iddle-earth, where the remnants of the D_únedain and the E_ldar remained to oppose S_auron. He was known by many names D_uring the long years he wandered: Elves named him M_ithrandir, the "Grey Pilgrim", while the Men of A_rnor coined G_andalf, which became his most common name. He was also known as I_ncánus in the South and as T_harkûn to the Dwarves.[4] He later revealed himself as one of the I_stari, and eventually became known as not only the wisest but also the most powerful of them.

A legend tells that G_andalf had been given by Y_avanna the E_lfstone of E_ärendil, to bring to the peoples of M_iddle-earth as a token that the V_alar had not forsook them. He gave this to G_aladriel, bearer of one of the three Elven R_ings and mighty among the E_ldar, who prophesied that she would in turn pass it to one who would also be called E_lessar.[6]

Reemergence of the N_ecromancer
Around year T_A 1100, the I_stari and E_ldar discovered that some evil entity resided in at Dol G_uldur in M_irkwood; while some thought a N_azgûl had returned to torment the world, or some new evil was arising, G_andalf began to suspect that perhaps S_auron himself might have returned.[5][7] As in the next two hundred years, evil continued to grow and spread, as well as the source directing it. G_andalf went to Dol G_uldur in T_A 2063 to discover its secret.[5] However, the N_ecromancer fled upon G_andalf's arrival, preventing G_andalf from identifying him.[7] After G_andalf's incursion, the evil there seemed to desist, and its absence allowed for some centuries of calmness.[7]

That peaceful period was known as the Watchful Peace and lasted for almost four hundred years, but the N_azgûl had used this period to prepare for S_auron's return, in T_A 2460.[5] Realising the returning evil, G_aladriel formed and reunited the W_hite C_ouncil three years later composed of four members: herself, G_andalf, S_aruman, and E_lrond the Half-elf (who was the bearer of another of the Three R_ings). G_aladriel wished G_andalf to be the chief of the C_ouncil, but he refused the position, wishing to set down no roots and to maintain his independence; S_aruman took this place instead because of his vast knowledge and skill.[7] However, he later grew jealous and afraid of G_andalf,[5] which was one of the reasons for his future betrayal.

D_uring his wanderings in Eriador, G_andalf met and befriended the isolated and secretive people of the H_obbits in their country, the S_hire. D_uring the Long Winter of T_A 2758 G_andalf came to their aid.[5] It was then when he witnessed and admired the pity and courage that the humble H_obbits reserved in their hearts.[8] He then passed onward but nevertheless would return to visit the S_hire occasionally and participate in the Midsummer-eve parties of the Old T_ook, where he impressed young H_obbits with his fireworks, and his stories about Dragons, G_oblins and princesses.[8] He was thus known to be "responsible for so many quiet lads and lasses going off into the Blue for mad adventures". He also met a relatively adventurous H_obbit named B_ilbo B_aggins, although he was in fact far from "adventuresome."[9]

When King T_hráin II, a Dwarf of the royal line of D_urin, disappeared on journey to E_rebor, G_andalf looked for him. At some point after T_A 2845 he entered the abandoned city of K_hazad-dûm D_uring this search. After this proved to be in vain, the Wizard exited through the Doors of D_urin; however this experience did not help him know how to open the doors from the outside.[10] In T_A 2850, his quest led him once more to Dol G_uldur, this time in secrecy.[5] He found T_hráin in the dungeons, who gave the Wizard his last possessions, the map and key to E_rebor.[11] Most importantly, he found out that the N_ecromancer was not a N_azgûl – it was S_auron himself, and he had taken the last of the Seven R_ings from the Dwarf King; S_auron was gathering the remaining R_ings of Power and possibly searching for his lost One R_ing.

G_andalf escaped Dol G_uldur and returned to the W_hite C_ouncil.[7] After relating his discoveries, he urged the C_ouncil to attack S_auron while the One R_ing was still lost and while S_auron's power was not yet beginning to be restored . But S_aruman said that it was better to watch and wait; that the One R_ing had long ago rolled from A_nduin to the Sea. The majority of the C_ouncil agreed with S_aruman. E_lrond later privately told G_andalf he had a foreboding that the R_ing would be found, and that the war to end the Age was coming. Indeed, E_lrond added, he feared that it would end in darkness and despair. G_andalf encouraged him, saying there were many "strange chances," and that, "help oft shall come from the hands of the weak". G_andalf did not yet realize that S_aruman now wanted the R_ing for himself and was secretly searching for it along the banks of the River A_nduin.

As time went on, the wizard became increasingly troubled by his knowledge of S_auron's resurgent strength. He knew that S_auron was already plotting war from Dol G_uldur, and that as soon as he felt strong enough, he would attack R_ivendell. Unfortunately, the only power left besides R_ivendell to resist an attempt from M_irkwood to regain the lands of A_ngmar were the isolated Dwarves of the I_ron Hills.
