Journey to R_ivendell
G_andalf hurriedly went to R_ohan, desiring to find a strong steed; there he obtained S_hadowfax from King T_héoden, who later resented the gift. This mighty horse and G_andalf forged a special bond, and G_andalf made quick use of S_hadowfax's incredible strength and endurance.

G_andalf sped to the S_hire. Fortunately, F_rodo had already left the S_hire without waiting for G_andalf, and was seeking the refuge of R_ivendell. Upon arrival, G_andalf learned that the N_azgûl, arrayed as B_lack Riders, had been searching the area. Dismayed, he set out for B_ree; B_arliman apologised to G_andalf for forgetting to send the letter, worried that the H_obbits had left with S_trider, the suspicious Ranger. But for G_andalf, this was a hope which far exceeded his expectations. After congratulating a puzzled B_arliman, and blessing his beer, G_andalf then made for W_eathertop, a high point in the region, to observe the surrounding area.

There he was assaulted at night by the N_azgûl, but drove them off after a great battle of light and flame. These phenomena were seen by A_ragorn and the H_obbits from afar, without knowing it was G_andalf. Before leaving, he marked some stones with the cirth G for them to find, then fled east, drawing four of the R_ingwraiths after him.

Several days later, F_rodo, A_ragorn, and company stayed at W_eathertop and were confronted by the remaining five N_azgûl. Despite their escape, F_rodo was stabbed in the process by the Lord of the N_azgûl with a Morgul-knife.[27] G_andalf was able to evade the four N_azgûl and successfully reach R_ivendell and was welcomed by G_lorfindel. However, several days later, an injured F_rodo arrived at the Ford of B_ruinen, though the N_azgûl pursued him all the way there. G_andalf, along with E_lrond, saved F_rodo from the N_azgûl by enchanting the water and sweeping them away.[28]

Forming of the Fellowship
E_lrond called a C_ouncil after F_rodo was healed to consider the momentous decision regarding the R_ing. There G_andalf explained to the others how he had been imprisoned in I_sengard and how S_aruman was building his own army of Orcs to eventually betray S_auron, his new master.[25] By chance, representatives of most of the free peoples happened to be in R_ivendell already for various reasons. E_lrond and G_andalf advised that the R_ing should be destroyed in the fires of M_ount Doom, where it was made. Others dissented or objected, but eventually submitted to G_andalf's plan. Ultimately, E_lrond appointed the Fellowship of the R_ing as nine walkers, numerically set against S_auron's nine N_azgûl. The relatively small number reflected the realisation by E_lrond and the other C_ouncil members that the Quest of M_ount Doom would not rely upon strength of arms, but on stealth and good fortune. G_andalf was chosen to lead the company, which included A_ragorn, B_oromir of G_ondor, L_egolas the Elf, G_imli the Dwarf, and the H_obbits F_rodo, S_amwise G_amgee, P_eregrin T_ook, and M_eriadoc B_randybuck.

Several obstacles stood in the company's way. G_andalf was determined not to lead the company near I_sengard, so the vast M_isty Mountains had to be crossed. G_andalf decided to take a southern route to the R_edhorn Pass and cross the mountains that way, traversing the mountain range and avoiding I_sengard. When this attempt failed due to a terrible storm, he then decided to take the Fellowship through the ruins of M_oria, where the remains of the great Dwarf city of K_hazad-dûm was now a labyrinth of abandoned tunnels under the mountains. Others in the company were loathe to enter the maze, as it was now the lair of Orcs and something known only as "D_urin's Bane".
