Fall of S_auron
In M_inas T_irith, G_andalf was selected by A_ragorn, I_mrahil, and É_omer (the Captains of the West) to be their leader in the coming final battles. This would be the culmination of G_andalf's efforts in M_iddle-earth. Fully aware that the west would stand or fall on the outcome of F_rodo's mission, he advised the lords to launch an attack against the M_orannon, thereby drawing S_auron's eye away from F_rodo's likely location. This plan surely would result in a catastrophic loss for the outnumbered army, but it gave F_rodo a chance to achieve the quest of M_ount Doom.

Led by G_andalf and A_ragorn, the Army of the West crossed the A_nduin and marched north, pausing occasionally to announce their coming and to dispatch small numbers of men to lesser tasks. Upon arriving at the B_lack Gate, the forces halted and prepared for battle. As they ordered their companies, the foul Mouth of S_auron rode forth to parley with them; he revealed F_rodo's M_ithril Coat and S_am's B_arrow-blade and implied that their owner was captured and tortured. The emissary of S_auron then proposed that the forces of the west surrender; G_andalf however was undaunted, and, seizing his friend's belongings, rejected S_auron's offer. In shock, the Mouth of S_auron turned back towards the B_lack Gate, which slowly opened to reveal a vast army of Orcs and T_rolls advancing on the lords of the west. S_auron's trap was sprung.

Yet S_auron himself became the victim of G_andalf's trap. Unbeknownst to all, F_rodo and S_am had succeeded in scaling M_ount Doom and even as the Battle of the B_lack Gate began F_rodo stood at the C_racks of Doom. But the power and lure of the R_ing finally overcame his will and he placed the R_ing upon his finger, claiming it as his own. Immediately the N_azgûl were summoned by their lord, as he in terror realized his blunder: his enemies intended to destroy his R_ing.

But G_andalf's foresight proved accurate again as the creature G_ollum, who had been doggedly following the R_ing-bearer, seized the R_ing from F_rodo, and, while celebrating his reunion with "his p_recious," unwittingly fell into the fires of O_rodruin. the R_ing was unmade as the fiery mountain erupted. The tower of B_arad-dûr, the B_lack Gate and the T_owers of the Teeth began to collapse, their foundations crumbling, the R_ing-wraiths burned out like shooting stars, and S_auron was reduced to a mere shadow of malice, never to torment the world again. With S_auron gone, his forces scattered like frightened insects; the Men of the West now set upon them with fury. G_andalf announced the success of the R_ing-bearer and the end of S_auron; the quest had been fulfilled. Seeing that victory was achieved, G_andalf then mounted on G_waihir the E_agle for a third time, and set out to see if F_rodo and S_amwise had survived the tumults of M_ount Doom. To his great relief, the two were found on the slopes of O_rodruin, clinging to life amid the volcanic eruptions. The great quest was over.
