But G_andalf's spirit did not depart M_iddle-earth forever at this time. As the only one of the five I_stari to stay true to his errand, O_lórin/G_andalf was sent back to mortal lands by E_ru, and he became G_andalf once again. Yet, as he was now the sole emissary of the V_alar to M_iddle-earth, he was granted the power to "reveal" more of his inner M_aiar strength. This naked power that lay within him was seldom used D_uring the remainder of his time in M_iddle-earth, as his mission was essentially the same: to support and succor those who opposed S_auron. Nevertheless, when G_andalf's wrath was kindled his "unveiled" strength was such that few of S_auron's servants could withstand him.

Three days later he was found by the windlord G_waihir, Lord of the E_agles, who had been sent by G_aladriel to find him. G_andalf was carried to C_aras G_aladhon in L_othlórien, where he was healed, given a new staff, and clothed in white, and thus became G_andalf the White. He soon learned that F_rodo and S_am had left the Fellowship and were attempting the quest of M_ount Doom without the others, and was greatly gladdened to hear that S_am had accompanied F_rodo.

War in R_ohan
As F_rodo was beyond his assistance now, G_andalf promptly went south to F_angorn Forest, where he met the T_hree Hunters, A_ragorn, L_egolas, and G_imli, and gave them messages from G_aladriel. Then he called forth S_hadowfax, and rode with them to Edoras. There he found that S_aruman's spy G_ríma W_ormtongue had deceived King T_héoden into hopeless impotence. G_andalf quickly deposed W_ormtongue and encouraged T_héoden to ride west to war against S_aruman. G_andalf by now was keenly aware that the great war to end the age was beginning; if I_sengard conquered R_ohan then G_ondor would be crushed between the Enemy's pincers.[30][31]

Keep well the Lord of the Mark, till I return. Await me at H_elm's Gate. Farewell!
—G_andalf to A_ragorn and É_omer and the men of the king's household

At G_andalf's encouragement, King T_héoden went west to the H_ornburg where he was quickly besieged; G_andalf then searched for E_rkenbrand and the scattered forces of the W_estfold, which he later found and led to the Deep, thus breaking the siege. Meanwhile, the E_nts (along with, and persuaded by, the H_obbits M_erry and P_ippin) moved against S_aruman and sent H_uorns against the Orcs, resulting in the utter ruin of the outer walls of I_sengard and the complete annihilation of S_aruman's Orcs.

Then I gave [S_aruman] a last choice and a fair one: to renounce both M_ordor and his private schemes, and make amends by helping us in our need.
—G_andalf to M_erry, The Lord of the R_ings, T_he Two Towers, Book Three, Chapter X: "The Voice of S_aruman"

After the battle, G_andalf went to O_rthanc with T_héoden, A_ragorn, and a small group to confront S_aruman. There S_aruman attempted to sway G_andalf to his side one more time, but G_andalf remained undaunted, recalling S_aruman's actions as the "jailor of M_ordor" D_uring his last visit to I_sengard. Reminding S_aruman that he had betrayed both "[his] neighbors" and "[his] new master", G_andalf offered him a chance of redemption, if S_aruman came down and surrendered his staff and the keys of O_rthanc as a pledge. The Wizard, however, squandered this chance with contempt. G_andalf then broke S_aruman's staff and expelled him from both the I_stari's ranks and the W_hite C_ouncil. As S_aruman crawled back into O_rthanc, G_ríma, unsure whether he hated S_aruman or G_andalf more, threw down the tower's p_alantír and hit neither; the S_eeing Stone was picked up by P_ippin and taken by G_andalf. G_andalf imposed a strict watch on I_sengard by the E_nts and then advised T_héoden to ride to G_ondor's defense as soon as possible. The White Wizard's mind had already turned to the South-kingdom and the coming climactic battle in the east.[32]
