G_andalf the Grey has command over a great array of spells for all situations, such as magically healing wounds (though he stated E_lrond was a better healer), being able to enhance E_lrond's flood spell by giving the water the appearance of galloping knights, and seal doors shut or open them, although it should be noted that he was unable to open the Doors of D_urin prior to remembering the password. D_uring the B_attle of Five Armies, G_andalf amplified his voice to be heard by the armies of Men, Elves, and Dwarves. G_andalf could control the color and shape of smoke, such as to make a cloud of smoke float around himself. Moreover, G_andalf could manipulate the taste of beer, and he stated that D_urin's Bane nearly overpowered him with its counterspell, forcing him to rely on a word of Command that resulted in a blast which caused the ceiling of the room beyond the door to collapse. G_andalf also could make illusions such as when he covered B_ilbo's use of the One R_ing at his party. G_andalf once had a comprehensive knowledge of Orc, Elf, and Manish magic, at least for the defending and locking of places, and while he had forgotten many of these spells by the time of the Great War of the R_ing, he still had a firm grasp of many.

G_andalf the White displayed these same powers, but more advanced and with a few more spells. When he first met A_ragorn, G_imli, and L_egolas in his new form, he shocked and quickly overpowered them with his agility and magic: he effortlessly disarmed the former two, one by causing his sword to burst into flames, the other by pulling the axe from his hands with a wave of his staff, and burnt the Elf's arrow into nothing when the latter loosed it. Shortly afterwards, he said that he had recently battled the Eye of S_auron to prevent him from locating F_rodo, and although successful, the confrontation left him spent. G_andalf's mere presence was frightening to those who were about him if the White Wizard willed it and his voice could stun weaker beings or cause them to hesitate. G_andalf the White could force others to obey his orders, as he demonstrated against G_imli and S_aruman. He also displayed the ability to communicate with horses and was able to reach S_hadowfax with his mind. G_andalf's control over lighting and shadows increased after his return, as he was able to strike down G_ríma W_ormtongue without really harming the man, just after conT_rolling the darkness in a whole room to remove the light as a show of power. He later displayed the ability to focus raw light (called the "white fire") into beams and blasts to drive off the R_ingwraiths and these attacks were so powerful that only the W_itch-king dared to duel G_andalf, using this spell caused G_andalf's eyes to glow. G_andalf also telekinetically disarmed D_enethor and was able to increase his physical strength, without needing to speak spells. Finally, he also shattered S_aruman’s staff, and thus stripped the rogue wizard of his divine/magical power, save the power of S_aruman's voice.

For all his power as G_andalf the White, he admitted that S_auron was still stronger and was unsure if he could defeat the W_itch-king, once the latter had been empowered for the assault on G_ondor.

G_andalf also displayed immense physical durability and endurance. D_uring his fight with D_urin's Bane, G_andalf survived a long fall into an icy lake, as well as burns from the B_alrog's flames. Afterwards, G_andalf still had the strength to chase the B_alrog up the Endless Stair, and ultimately defeat him, though at the cost of his own life.

As his unrestricted form, O_lórin, he likely had all his previous powers massively boosted, and the abilities to shapeshift and to travel at unfathomable speeds, among others. However, even this form seems to have restrictions, as the A_inur were said to have their power restricted upon descending to Earth.
