G_andalf, known largely as the Grey and later, briefly, the White, and originally named O_lórin (Q_uenya), was an I_star (Wizard), dispatched to M_iddle-earth in the T_hird Age to combat the threat of S_auron. He joined T_horin II and his company to reclaim the L_onely Mountain from S_maug, helped form the Fellowship of the R_ing to destroy the O_ne R_ing, and led the Free Peoples of the World in the final campaign of the War of the R_ing.

Biography

Originally called O_lórin, he was accounted as the wisest of the M_aiar. He was created by I_lúvatar before the Music of the A_inur,[1] and was at the beginning of Time amongst the A_inur who entered into Eä.[2] In his "youth" he became one of the M_aiar who served M_anwë, V_arda, I_rmo, and N_ienna. He was associated with light and fire, much like V_arda,[3] yet his ways often took him to N_ienna, from whom he learned pity and patience. He loved the Elves, but walked unseen among them, or wore the guise of an Elf, and sent them fair visions in their hearts that made them wiser. Throughout his life he followed the example of N_ienna, talking pity on the sorrows of the Children of I_lúvatar and drawing those who listened to him out of despair.[3]

When the V_alar decided to send the I_stari (also called Wizards) to M_iddle-earth to counsel and assist all those who opposed the Dark Lord S_auron, M_anwë and V_arda included O_lórin among the five to be sent. At first, O_lórin was nervous and described himself as too weak and afraid of S_auron. M_anwë understood, and told O_lórin that such was a reason why he should go, to overcome that fear. Furthermore, the O_ne R_ing, containing much of S_auron's power, presumably still existed somewhere. Thus, M_anwë insisted that O_lórin should go as the third, but V_arda convinced him to send O_lórin as the second instead.[4] He agreed, and prepared for O_lórin's departure from the U_ndying Lands with the other four, arriving about the same time that the N_ecromancer appeared in M_irkwood.

T_hird Age
Arrival in M_iddle-earth
O_lórin, like the other Wizards, took the shape of an old man. He was robed in grey and wandered about as a counsellor. At M_ithlond he was welcomed by G_lorfindel, his friend from V_alinor (who had been sent earlier on a similar mission), and C_írdan the shipwright who possessed N_arya, one of the Three E_lven R_ings of Power. C_írdan divined in O_lórin a sense of strength and power despite his appearance as a bent and aged man. C_írdan gave N_arya to O_lórin with a prediction of his future struggles with evil, and a promise that it would support and aid him in his labours.[5]

He then began his sojourn in M_iddle-earth and over many centuries, he walked among the Elves as a stranger, learning from them and teaching them. Unlike S_aruman, O_lórin never took up permanent residence, and never went to the east, apparently restricting his activities to the Westlands of M_iddle-earth, where the remnants of the D_únedain and the E_ldar remained to oppose S_auron. He was known by many names D_uring the long years he wandered: Elves named him M_ithrandir, the "Grey Pilgrim", while the Men of A_rnor coined G_andalf, which became his most common name. He was also known as I_ncánus in the South and as T_harkûn to the Dwarves.[4] He later revealed himself as one of the I_stari, and eventually became known as not only the wisest but also the most powerful of them.

A legend tells that G_andalf had been given by Y_avanna the E_lfstone of E_ärendil, to bring to the peoples of M_iddle-earth as a token that the V_alar had not forsook them. He gave this to G_aladriel, bearer of one of the three Elven R_ings and mighty among the E_ldar, who prophesied that she would in turn pass it to one who would also be called E_lessar.[6]

Reemergence of the N_ecromancer
Around year T_A 1100, the I_stari and E_ldar discovered that some evil entity resided in at Dol G_uldur in M_irkwood; while some thought a N_azgûl had returned to torment the world, or some new evil was arising, G_andalf began to suspect that perhaps S_auron himself might have returned.[5][7] As in the next two hundred years, evil continued to grow and spread, as well as the source directing it. G_andalf went to Dol G_uldur in T_A 2063 to discover its secret.[5] However, the N_ecromancer fled upon G_andalf's arrival, preventing G_andalf from identifying him.[7] After G_andalf's incursion, the evil there seemed to desist, and its absence allowed for some centuries of calmness.[7]

That peaceful period was known as the Watchful Peace and lasted for almost four hundred years, but the N_azgûl had used this period to prepare for S_auron's return, in T_A 2460.[5] Realising the returning evil, G_aladriel formed and reunited the W_hite C_ouncil three years later composed of four members: herself, G_andalf, S_aruman, and E_lrond the Half-elf (who was the bearer of another of the Three R_ings). G_aladriel wished G_andalf to be the chief of the C_ouncil, but he refused the position, wishing to set down no roots and to maintain his independence; S_aruman took this place instead because of his vast knowledge and skill.[7] However, he later grew jealous and afraid of G_andalf,[5] which was one of the reasons for his future betrayal.

D_uring his wanderings in Eriador, G_andalf met and befriended the isolated and secretive people of the H_obbits in their country, the S_hire. D_uring the Long Winter of T_A 2758 G_andalf came to their aid.[5] It was then when he witnessed and admired the pity and courage that the humble H_obbits reserved in their hearts.[8] He then passed onward but nevertheless would return to visit the S_hire occasionally and participate in the Midsummer-eve parties of the Old T_ook, where he impressed young H_obbits with his fireworks, and his stories about Dragons, G_oblins and princesses.[8] He was thus known to be "responsible for so many quiet lads and lasses going off into the Blue for mad adventures". He also met a relatively adventurous H_obbit named B_ilbo B_aggins, although he was in fact far from "adventuresome."[9]

When King T_hráin II, a Dwarf of the royal line of D_urin, disappeared on journey to E_rebor, G_andalf looked for him. At some point after T_A 2845 he entered the abandoned city of K_hazad-dûm D_uring this search. After this proved to be in vain, the Wizard exited through the Doors of D_urin; however this experience did not help him know how to open the doors from the outside.[10] In T_A 2850, his quest led him once more to Dol G_uldur, this time in secrecy.[5] He found T_hráin in the dungeons, who gave the Wizard his last possessions, the map and key to E_rebor.[11] Most importantly, he found out that the N_ecromancer was not a N_azgûl – it was S_auron himself, and he had taken the last of the Seven R_ings from the Dwarf King; S_auron was gathering the remaining R_ings of Power and possibly searching for his lost O_ne R_ing.

G_andalf escaped Dol G_uldur and returned to the W_hite C_ouncil.[7] After relating his discoveries, he urged the C_ouncil to attack S_auron while the O_ne R_ing was still lost and while S_auron's power was not yet beginning to be restored . But S_aruman said that it was better to watch and wait; that the O_ne R_ing had long ago rolled from A_nduin to the Sea. The majority of the C_ouncil agreed with S_aruman. E_lrond later privately told G_andalf he had a foreboding that the R_ing would be found, and that the war to end the Age was coming. Indeed, E_lrond added, he feared that it would end in darkness and despair. G_andalf encouraged him, saying there were many "strange chances," and that, "help oft shall come from the hands of the weak". G_andalf did not yet realize that S_aruman now wanted the R_ing for himself and was secretly searching for it along the banks of the River A_nduin.

As time went on, the wizard became increasingly troubled by his knowledge of S_auron's resurgent strength. He knew that S_auron was already plotting war from Dol G_uldur, and that as soon as he felt strong enough, he would attack R_ivendell. Unfortunately, the only power left besides R_ivendell to resist an attempt from M_irkwood to regain the lands of A_ngmar were the isolated Dwarves of the I_ron Hills.

Quest of E_rebor
Main article: Quest of E_rebor
Conception of a plan
Over the years, G_andalf became concerned about the weak state of the North. S_maug the dragon had destroyed both the Kingdom under the Mountain and the town of D_ale, and the wizard feared that S_auron might use the desolation around E_rebor to regain the northern passes in the mountains and reclaim the old lands of A_ngmar. Worse still, G_andalf knew that it was only a matter of time before the Dark Lord regained enough power to exert influence over S_maug. With the dragon at his command, S_auron's victory would be all but assured.

G_andalf knew that exiled Dwarf King of D_urin's Folk, T_horin II, planned to battle against S_maug, but he knew that it would not be enough. In T_A 2941,[5] while staying the night in B_ree, G_andalf happened across the Dwarf King.[8] T_horin initiated conversation; he had been having a strange feeling urging him to seek G_andalf. The same was intrigued, for he had thought to seek T_horin as well. They found they were taking the same road for a while (T_horin passing through the S_hire on his way to the E_red Luin), and they agreed to travel together. T_horin wanted advice, and G_andalf in turn wanted to discuss the dragon S_maug with T_horin.

Ultimately, G_andalf concocted a plan wherein T_horin could destroy S_maug and recover his family fortune, albeit with a "burglar" of G_andalf's own choosing.

Leading the company

Feeling that a H_obbit should be involved, G_andalf remembered B_ilbo B_aggins. At first he found only H_olman C_otton as B_ilbo had left on the occasion of the Elven new year, something that persuaded G_andalf that B_ilbo was the right person for the job.[8] He visited B_ilbo later, bringing along the kinsmen of T_horin.[9] In the end, G_andalf convinced the reluctant B_aggins to become a burglar for T_horin. G_andalf then accompanied T_horin and Company to R_ivendell. D_uring the journey G_andalf was instrumental in saving the travellers' lives from several calamities. He saved them from a trio of Stone-T_rolls, and later obtained the legendary sword G_lamdring from their T_roll-hoard; G_andalf bore it thenceforth.[12]

He also helped T_horin and Company through the M_isty Mountains; when unknowingly they camped in the Front Porch of G_oblin-town, the Northern Orcs captured the whole company except G_andalf, who surprised them much later, killing the Great G_oblin and then leading the Dwarves to the G_oblin-gate.[13] It was D_uring this time that B_ilbo obtained a "magic r_ing".[14] B_ilbo initially claimed he "won" it from the creature "G_ollum" while the company was under the M_isty Mountains.[15] the R_ing conferred invisibility on B_ilbo when he wore it, and he kept it secret from G_andalf for some time.

On their escape out, the Company was saved by the E_agles of the M_isty Mountains; G_andalf once had healed the Lord of the E_agles from an arrow-wound, and thenceforth they became friends. The E_agles picked them up from the Great Shelf, and the next day they dropped them off on the C_arrock.[15]

Pressing business

G_andalf then sought the hospitality of B_eorn, persuading him to welcome and host the whole Company in his hall. But then he left the quest prior to its completion; after leading the Company to the outskirts of the Forest Gate, he gave them some final advice before they entered M_irkwood, and went to attend other obligations.[16][17] The W_hite C_ouncil had met under the gravest of circumstances: S_auron's power was returning, even without his R_ing. G_andalf at last convinced the C_ouncil to attack Dol G_uldur, to which even S_aruman agreed (as by now he feared S_auron as a rival, and wished to delay his search for the R_ing). G_andalf joined his peers in assailing Dol G_uldur, ridding M_irkwood of the N_ecromancer's presence, who fled to M_ordor to his long-prepared stronghold of B_arad-dûr.[18] When he was about to finish his task, news about what happened to T_horin's Company in M_irkwood reached him, and realized that the instructions he gave did not help them; they had lost their way, and then vanished due to the encounter with the Wood-elves, who had captured them. He was anxious to get back to them as soon as possible.[19]

The B_attle of Five Armies
Meanwhile T_horin's quest was successful: E_rebor was retaken and S_maug was killed,[20] but when G_andalf finally arrived to the area, he found the Dwarves of E_rebor and the I_ron Hills preparing for an attack by the L_ake-men and the Elves of M_irkwood. He was with Bard and T_hranduil and thus revealed his presence, trying to reason with T_horin. When the attack was beginning, G_andalf halted them, to warn that the Orcs and Wargs were coming to claim the treasure. He invited D_áin Ironfoot for C_ouncil, and soon Dwarves, Elves and Men formed an alliance, and defeated the Orcs of the M_isty Mountains in the B_attle of Five Armies.[21]

King T_horin was mortally wounded and, after his funeral and the reestablishment of E_rebor under D_áin, B_ilbo and G_andalf followed their way back; they celebrated Yule at B_eorn's, and then returned to R_ivendell, where he discussed with E_lrond the events of Dol G_uldur and the L_onely Mountain. G_andalf had accomplished his immediate goal, which was to destroy S_maug, since he could have been used to disastrous effect by S_auron. A large number of Orcs and Wargs also were killed in the North, removing threats to R_ivendell and L_othlórien.[8] The two agreed that it would be better if the N_ecromancer were banished from the world altogether.[22]

As G_andalf and B_ilbo passed by the site of their former encounter with the stone-T_rolls, they made sure to recover the gold of the T_roll-hoard they had buried before the Wizard left to perform other duties and B_ilbo returned to the S_hire.[22] G_andalf, for his part, found himself amazed by the H_obbit; until then, the Wise had paid no attention to H_obbits and knew little of them. For the rest of his sojourn in M_iddle-earth, G_andalf took a special interest in H_obbits, and particularly in the B_aggins family.

Despite the C_ouncil's hopes, S_auron was not weakened by this attack. He had foreseen the move that drove him from M_irkwood, and his retreat was but a feint. Ten years after the attack, S_auron declared himself openly in M_ordor in 2951 and rebuilt his fortress of B_arad-dûr. The W_hite C_ouncil met for one last time in 2953 to debate the fate of the R_ings of Power. S_aruman quieted his peers claiming to have the knowledge that the O_ne R_ing was lost in the Belegaer. After their meeting, S_aruman, jealous and afraid of G_andalf, set spies to watch all his movements; this would affect the peaceful H_obbits, as S_aruman thus discovered the existence and noted G_andalf's interest in the S_hire, and started sending agents to B_ree and the Southfarthing.[5]

In 2956, G_andalf met A_ragorn, the hidden Heir of I_sildur, and soon became friends with him. From that point on A_ragorn and G_andalf often worked together towards a common end - the defeat of S_auron.

Return to the S_hire
D_uring this period G_andalf visited the S_hire frequently, especially his friend B_ilbo B_aggins, and his younger nephew, F_rodo. He noted B_ilbo's unusual youthfulness, despite his advancing age; the suspicious "magic r_ing" that B_ilbo had acquired D_uring his adventure began to weigh on his mind. G_andalf recalled the deceit B_ilbo used in originally claiming it for his own—B_ilbo had later admitted to stealing it from G_ollum. G_andalf could see that B_ilbo was now very preoccupied with the R_ing and had begun to suspect that the same was indeed a r_ing of power. Such un-H_obbitlike behaviour aroused his suspicions.

In 3001, B_ilbo planned what would become known as his Farewell Birthday Party, and at the culmination of the H_obbit's speech, B_ilbo put on the mysterious R_ing and disappeared, as a joke on his neighbors. Later as he was bidding farewell to G_andalf, who had known about his plans to leave, B_ilbo began to change his mind about leaving his R_ing to F_rodo, as he had earlier agreed. When G_andalf tried to persuade him to leave it, B_ilbo became hostile and accused G_andalf of trying to steal the R_ing for his own benefit, which he referred to as his "p_recious." Horrified by B_ilbo's outburst, G_andalf stood to his full height and projected his power, frightening the H_obbit. This brought B_ilbo back to his senses; he apologized, admitting that the R_ing had been troubling him lately, and begrudgingly left it behind. B_ilbo and G_andalf bid each other goodbye before B_ilbo left the S_hire for his journey.[23] Before leaving the S_hire, he spoke with F_rodo, emphatically warning him not to use the R_ing.[24]

Searching for the R_ing
Keen now to find out more about G_ollum, he sought A_ragorn's help to capture him. Studying the records in M_inas T_irith, he found the Scroll of I_sildur and pieced together the missing history of the O_ne R_ing. In T_A 3017 on his way back to the S_hire he got word from the G_aladhrim that A_ragorn had finally captured G_ollum and he went to M_irkwood to meet him. For days he interrogated him in order to verify what he already suspected. A great fear came over him when he learned that G_ollum had been to the Tower of B_arad-dûr. S_auron had tortured G_ollum and learned not only of the "magic r_ing", but also the names "S_hire" and "B_aggins". G_andalf left M_irkwood soon after, and left G_ollum with the Wood-elves of Northern M_irkwood.[5] He now returned in haste to the S_hire, certain that F_rodo's ring was not simply a r_ing of power: it was the One Ruling R_ing of S_auron.

War of the R_ing
Upon returning to the S_hire, G_andalf immediately went to F_rodo and confirmed his suspicions by throwing the R_ing into F_rodo's hearth fire, which revealed, in B_lack Speech, the inscription upon the R_ing. G_andalf then told a dumbfounded F_rodo about the O_ne R_ing and its history, and how S_auron would seek to regain it. Instructing F_rodo to go to R_ivendell with the R_ing, G_andalf told him to make arrangements to leave the S_hire quietly.

While in the S_hire, he had a sense of foreboding; in the aftermath of S_auron's assault on O_sgiliath, G_andalf heard disturbing news about war in G_ondor and a Black Shadow. He started wandering around Eriador, hearing news from the refugees who had a fear they could not speak about, until he met R_adagast the Brown who brought a message from S_aruman that he must seek him at once; and a warning that the R_ingwraiths were looking for the S_hire.[25] He went to The P_rancing Pony at B_ree. Believing that he would not be able to return to F_rodo in time, he wrote a letter, urging him to move as soon as possible for R_ivendell, and seek a "S_trider" whose real name was A_ragorn, along with a riddle to identify him; G_andalf would then try to catch up with them when available. He also instructed B_arliman B_utterbur to send the letter to H_obbiton and to expect a Mr. B_aggins that would come under the name of "Mr. U_nderhill". He left the inn, but B_arliman would forget to send the letter.[26]

S_aruman's betrayal
I keep a clearer memory of your arguments, and deeds, than you suppose. When last I visited you, you were the jailor of M_ordor, and there I was to be sent.
—G_andalf to S_aruman, The Lord of the R_ings, T_he Two Towers, Book Three, Ch. X: "The Voice of S_aruman"

Soon thereafter G_andalf arrived at I_sengard to consult with S_aruman. At their meeting, S_aruman finally revealed himself as "an ally, or servant of S_auron" and offered his "old friend and helper" two choices: to rule M_iddle-earth together with the Dark Lord or wield the R_ing's power for themselves. G_andalf refused "to submit to S_auron, or to [S_aruman]", and was imprisoned on the pinnacle of O_rthanc. G_andalf was aware that S_aruman would try to coerce the R_ing's whereabouts out of him and then hand him over to S_auron in M_ordor. But the Grey Pilgrim was saved from such a fate: G_waihir the Windlord, soon arrived and helped G_andalf escape. G_waihir's real purpose for visiting O_rthanc was to report a sighting of the N_azgûl, as R_adagast had appealed to him to do so earlier on. G_andalf knew he must return quickly to the S_hire, as F_rodo (and the R_ing) were in grave danger from both S_auron's chief agents: the N_azgûl and now S_aruman, who actually wanted the R_ing for himself.

Journey to R_ivendell
G_andalf hurriedly went to R_ohan, desiring to find a strong steed; there he obtained S_hadowfax from King T_héoden, who later resented the gift. This mighty horse and G_andalf forged a special bond, and G_andalf made quick use of S_hadowfax's incredible strength and endurance.

G_andalf sped to the S_hire. Fortunately, F_rodo had already left the S_hire without waiting for G_andalf, and was seeking the refuge of R_ivendell. Upon arrival, G_andalf learned that the N_azgûl, arrayed as B_lack Riders, had been searching the area. Dismayed, he set out for B_ree; B_arliman apologised to G_andalf for forgetting to send the letter, worried that the H_obbits had left with S_trider, the suspicious Ranger. But for G_andalf, this was a hope which far exceeded his expectations. After congratulating a puzzled B_arliman, and blessing his beer, G_andalf then made for W_eathertop, a high point in the region, to observe the surrounding area.

There he was assaulted at night by the N_azgûl, but drove them off after a great battle of light and flame. These phenomena were seen by A_ragorn and the H_obbits from afar, without knowing it was G_andalf. Before leaving, he marked some stones with the cirth G for them to find, then fled east, drawing four of the R_ingwraiths after him.

Several days later, F_rodo, A_ragorn, and company stayed at W_eathertop and were confronted by the remaining five N_azgûl. Despite their escape, F_rodo was stabbed in the process by the Lord of the N_azgûl with a Morgul-knife.[27] G_andalf was able to evade the four N_azgûl and successfully reach R_ivendell and was welcomed by G_lorfindel. However, several days later, an injured F_rodo arrived at the Ford of B_ruinen, though the N_azgûl pursued him all the way there. G_andalf, along with E_lrond, saved F_rodo from the N_azgûl by enchanting the water and sweeping them away.[28]

Forming of the Fellowship
E_lrond called a C_ouncil after F_rodo was healed to consider the momentous decision regarding the R_ing. There G_andalf explained to the others how he had been imprisoned in I_sengard and how S_aruman was building his own army of Orcs to eventually betray S_auron, his new master.[25] By chance, representatives of most of the free peoples happened to be in R_ivendell already for various reasons. E_lrond and G_andalf advised that the R_ing should be destroyed in the fires of M_ount Doom, where it was made. Others dissented or objected, but eventually submitted to G_andalf's plan. Ultimately, E_lrond appointed the Fellowship of the R_ing as nine walkers, numerically set against S_auron's nine N_azgûl. The relatively small number reflected the realisation by E_lrond and the other C_ouncil members that the Quest of M_ount Doom would not rely upon strength of arms, but on stealth and good fortune. G_andalf was chosen to lead the company, which included A_ragorn, B_oromir of G_ondor, L_egolas the Elf, G_imli the Dwarf, and the H_obbits F_rodo, S_amwise G_amgee, P_eregrin T_ook, and M_eriadoc B_randybuck.

Several obstacles stood in the company's way. G_andalf was determined not to lead the company near I_sengard, so the vast M_isty Mountains had to be crossed. G_andalf decided to take a southern route to the R_edhorn Pass and cross the mountains that way, traversing the mountain range and avoiding I_sengard. When this attempt failed due to a terrible storm, he then decided to take the Fellowship through the ruins of M_oria, where the remains of the great Dwarf city of K_hazad-dûm was now a labyrinth of abandoned tunnels under the mountains. Others in the company were loathe to enter the maze, as it was now the lair of Orcs and something known only as "D_urin's Bane".

Fall in M_oria
At the Doors of D_urin on the west side of the mountains, G_andalf, after some delay, spoke the password and led the company into the dark. Having been in M_oria on an earlier perilous errand, he was somewhat familiar with the underground passages. Eventually the party came to the Chamber of Mazarbul, where G_andalf read the Book of Records, which revealed the fate of Balin, the leader of an ill-fated attempt to re-colonise M_oria. Soon after, the party was attacked by Orcs, and forced to flee the chamber. By then G_andalf was well aware of their location, and he led the party quickly towards the eastern exit.

Y_ou cannot pass," he said. The Orcs stood still, and a dead silence fell. "I_ am a servant of the Secret Fire, wielder of the flame of A_nor. Y_ou cannot pass. The dark fire will not avail you, flame of U_dûn. Go back to the Shadow! Y_ou cannot pass.
—The Lord of the R_ings, The Fellowship of the R_ing, Book II, Ch. 5: "The Bridge of K_hazad-dûm"

Unfortunately D_urin's Bane caught up to the group at the Bridge of K_hazad-dûm. G_andalf and L_egolas immediately realised what it was: a B_alrog of M_orgoth, a servant of the first Dark Lord. In a spectacular display of bravery, G_andalf faced the demon and broke the bridge both stood upon, leaving the beast to fall into a seemingly bottomless chasm. But the B_alrog's whip lashed out, and grasped G_andalf by the knees, causing him to fall into the pit. While falling, G_andalf shouted "Fly, you fools" and vanished into the abyss.[29]

Yet G_andalf did not die; he and the B_alrog fell for a long time, and the wizard was burned by the B_alrog's fire. Then they plunged into a deep lake in the depths of the mountain, which G_andalf later said was cold as the tide of death and almost froze his heart. They fought in the water until finally the B_alrog fled into dark tunnels, where the world was gnawed by nameless things, older even than S_auron. G_andalf pursued the creature until it led him to the spiralling Endless Stair, and they climbed it until they reached D_urin's Tower in the living rock of Z_irakzigil, the pinnacle of the Silvertine above the clouds. There they fought, until at last G_andalf threw down his enemy, and the B_alrog broke the mountain-side as it fell. Then darkness took G_andalf, and he passed away. His body lay on the peak. The entire battle, from the confrontation on the Bridge of K_hazad-dûm to the mutual demise of the B_alrog and G_andalf, had taken ten days.

Resurrection
Then darkness took me, and I strayed out of thought and time, and I wandered far on roads that I will not tell... Naked I was sent back – for a brief time, until my task is done. And naked I lay upon the mountain-top. … There I lay staring upward, while the stars wheeled over, and each day was as long as a life-age of the earth.
—The Lord of the R_ings, T_he Two Towers, Book Three, Ch. V: "The W_hite Rider"

But G_andalf's spirit did not depart M_iddle-earth forever at this time. As the only one of the five I_stari to stay true to his errand, O_lórin/G_andalf was sent back to mortal lands by E_ru, and he became G_andalf once again. Yet, as he was now the sole emissary of the V_alar to M_iddle-earth, he was granted the power to "reveal" more of his inner M_aiar strength. This naked power that lay within him was seldom used D_uring the remainder of his time in M_iddle-earth, as his mission was essentially the same: to support and succor those who opposed S_auron. Nevertheless, when G_andalf's wrath was kindled his "unveiled" strength was such that few of S_auron's servants could withstand him.

Three days later he was found by the windlord G_waihir, Lord of the E_agles, who had been sent by G_aladriel to find him. G_andalf was carried to C_aras G_aladhon in L_othlórien, where he was healed, given a new staff, and clothed in white, and thus became G_andalf the White. He soon learned that F_rodo and S_am had left the Fellowship and were attempting the quest of M_ount Doom without the others, and was greatly gladdened to hear that S_am had accompanied F_rodo.

War in R_ohan
As F_rodo was beyond his assistance now, G_andalf promptly went south to F_angorn Forest, where he met the T_hree Hunters, A_ragorn, L_egolas, and G_imli, and gave them messages from G_aladriel. Then he called forth S_hadowfax, and rode with them to Edoras. There he found that S_aruman's spy G_ríma W_ormtongue had deceived King T_héoden into hopeless impotence. G_andalf quickly deposed W_ormtongue and encouraged T_héoden to ride west to war against S_aruman. G_andalf by now was keenly aware that the great war to end the age was beginning; if I_sengard conquered R_ohan then G_ondor would be crushed between the Enemy's pincers.[30][31]

Keep well the Lord of the Mark, till I return. Await me at H_elm's Gate. Farewell!
—G_andalf to A_ragorn and É_omer and the men of the king's household

At G_andalf's encouragement, King T_héoden went west to the Hornburg where he was quickly besieged; G_andalf then searched for Erkenbrand and the scattered forces of the W_estfold, which he later found and led to the Deep, thus breaking the siege. Meanwhile, the E_nts (along with, and persuaded by, the H_obbits M_erry and P_ippin) moved against S_aruman and sent H_uorns against the Orcs, resulting in the utter ruin of the outer walls of I_sengard and the complete annihilation of S_aruman's Orcs.

Then I gave [S_aruman] a last choice and a fair one: to renounce both M_ordor and his private schemes, and make amends by helping us in our need.
—G_andalf to M_erry, The Lord of the R_ings, T_he Two Towers, Book Three, Chapter X: "The Voice of S_aruman"

After the battle, G_andalf went to O_rthanc with T_héoden, A_ragorn, and a small group to confront S_aruman. There S_aruman attempted to sway G_andalf to his side one more time, but G_andalf remained undaunted, recalling S_aruman's actions as the "jailor of M_ordor" D_uring his last visit to I_sengard. Reminding S_aruman that he had betrayed both "[his] neighbors" and "[his] new master", G_andalf offered him a chance of redemption, if S_aruman came down and surrendered his staff and the keys of O_rthanc as a pledge. The Wizard, however, squandered this chance with contempt. G_andalf then broke S_aruman's staff and expelled him from both the I_stari's ranks and the W_hite C_ouncil. As S_aruman crawled back into O_rthanc, G_ríma, unsure whether he hated S_aruman or G_andalf more, threw down the tower's p_alantír and hit neither; the S_eeing Stone was picked up by P_ippin and taken by G_andalf. G_andalf imposed a strict watch on I_sengard by the E_nts and then advised T_héoden to ride to G_ondor's defense as soon as possible. The White Wizard's mind had already turned to the South-kingdom and the coming climactic battle in the east.[32]

Siege of G_ondor
As a 'reward' for P_ippin, who had foolishly gazed into a p_alantír, G_andalf took the H_obbit with him to M_inas T_irith, the last bastion of the west. Soon after arriving, G_andalf confronted D_enethor II, the Ruling Steward, and learned that he was near despair over the death of his eldest son, B_oromir. P_ippin entered the Steward's service in payment of the debt that he and M_erry owed, the death of B_oromir. Ostensibly they were allies, but the Steward treated G_andalf with scorn and suspicion. When F_aramir, the Steward's younger son, returned from O_sgiliath and was attacked by N_azgûl, G_andalf upon S_hadowfax drove them away by revealing the power within him; later F_aramir told him that F_rodo and S_am were still alive and headed towards M_ordor.

M_inas T_irith was soon besieged by a vast force from M_ordor, led by the W_itch-king of A_ngmar. F_aramir having received a wound from a poisoned dart in the retreat from O_sgiliath, lay near death inside the Tower. Still, G_andalf encouraged the men of M_inas T_irith to have hope, and dispelled the fear of the R_ingwraiths by his very presence. But S_auron's catapults hurled flaming bolts upon the city; soon the first circle of the city burned unchecked. D_enethor now lost all heart as the city burned and his only remaining son hovered near death; he abandoned his leadership of the city. G_andalf then took it upon himself to direct the defense in cooperation with Prince I_mrahil of Dol A_mroth. When the gigantic ram G_rond destroyed M_inas T_irith's Great Gate, G_andalf placed himself alone at the ruined gateway. The W_itch-king then appeared in the midst of the blasted gate upon a black horse and threatened G_andalf with death; but G_andalf did not move — seated upon S_hadowfax he defied the mightiest of S_auron's minions. However, the stand-off ended inconclusively, as the morning arrived along with the host of the R_ohirrim. Hearing the horns of the Riders of R_ohan, the W_itch-king departed.

But G_andalf did not pursue his foe, for P_ippin brought him news that D_enethor was about to commit suicide in the Houses of the Dead, burning himself and his son F_aramir on a pyre like the heathen Kings of old. G_andalf rushed to stop this madness and was able to save F_aramir, but not D_enethor, whose despair and grief had overcome his mind. G_andalf also learned how it was that D_enethor's will had been broken: D_enethor clutched a p_alantír in his hands as he burned. Clearly D_enethor had been using the stone's special properties for some time — extending his vision far beyond those of men's eyes, but also wrestling in thought with S_auron. And even though S_auron could not completely overwhelm D_enethor's mind, his courage was daunted by knowledge of the vast might of M_ordor. Thus the shadow entered into the capital of G_ondor.

Nevertheless, and against all hope, the siege was broken. É_owyn of R_ohan and the H_obbit M_erry defeated the W_itch-king, whose last wail was heard by many as he was reduced to impotence. Soon after, A_ragorn arrived with a large valour of Men from the southern fiefs upon a captured Corsair fleet from U_mbar. The forces of the men of the west then utterly defeated S_auron's attack against M_inas T_irith, relieving the city and killing virtually all of the invaders. G_andalf's carefully laid plans and words of wisdom, along with acts of heroism not seen since the elder days, had defeated S_auron's first move.

Fall of S_auron
In M_inas T_irith, G_andalf was selected by A_ragorn, I_mrahil, and É_omer (the Captains of the West) to be their leader in the coming final battles. This would be the culmination of G_andalf's efforts in M_iddle-earth. Fully aware that the west would stand or fall on the outcome of F_rodo's mission, he advised the lords to launch an attack against the M_orannon, thereby drawing S_auron's eye away from F_rodo's likely location. This plan surely would result in a catastrophic loss for the outnumbered army, but it gave F_rodo a chance to achieve the quest of M_ount Doom.

Led by G_andalf and A_ragorn, the Army of the West crossed the A_nduin and marched north, pausing occasionally to announce their coming and to dispatch small numbers of men to lesser tasks. Upon arriving at the B_lack Gate, the forces halted and prepared for battle. As they ordered their companies, the foul Mouth of S_auron rode forth to parley with them; he revealed F_rodo's M_ithril Coat and S_am's B_arrow-blade and implied that their owner was captured and tortured. The emissary of S_auron then proposed that the forces of the west surrender; G_andalf however was undaunted, and, seizing his friend's belongings, rejected S_auron's offer. In shock, the Mouth of S_auron turned back towards the B_lack Gate, which slowly opened to reveal a vast army of Orcs and T_rolls advancing on the lords of the west. S_auron's trap was sprung.

Yet S_auron himself became the victim of G_andalf's trap. Unbeknownst to all, F_rodo and S_am had succeeded in scaling M_ount Doom and even as the Battle of the B_lack Gate began F_rodo stood at the C_racks of Doom. But the power and lure of the R_ing finally overcame his will and he placed the R_ing upon his finger, claiming it as his own. Immediately the N_azgûl were summoned by their lord, as he in terror realized his blunder: his enemies intended to destroy his R_ing.

But G_andalf's foresight proved accurate again as the creature G_ollum, who had been doggedly following the R_ing-bearer, seized the R_ing from F_rodo, and, while celebrating his reunion with "his p_recious," unwittingly fell into the fires of O_rodruin. the R_ing was unmade as the fiery mountain erupted. The tower of B_arad-dûr, the B_lack Gate and the T_owers of the Teeth began to collapse, their foundations crumbling, the R_ing-wraiths burned out like shooting stars, and S_auron was reduced to a mere shadow of malice, never to torment the world again. With S_auron gone, his forces scattered like frightened insects; the Men of the West now set upon them with fury. G_andalf announced the success of the R_ing-bearer and the end of S_auron; the quest had been fulfilled. Seeing that victory was achieved, G_andalf then mounted on G_waihir the Eagle for a third time, and set out to see if F_rodo and S_amwise had survived the tumults of M_ount Doom. To his great relief, the two were found on the slopes of O_rodruin, clinging to life amid the volcanic eruptions. The great quest was over.

Final deeds
In M_inas T_irith, G_andalf and the remaining members of the Fellowship reunited. At the coronation of King E_lessar, G_andalf (at A_ragorn's request) set the crown upon the King's head, and declared "Now come the days of the King, and may they be blessed while the thrones of the V_alar endure!". Thus G_andalf ushered in the new age of Men. Not long after G_andalf led A_ragorn to a high hallow on the upper slopes of M_indolluin and there they found a sapling of the W_hite Tree of G_ondor, a sign of the renewal that was to come.

After the coronation and wedding of A_ragorn to Arwen, G_andalf left with the rest of the remaining Fellowship on the journey home. For G_andalf, it was his last long journey in M_iddle-earth. His errand had been fulfilled; S_auron had been defeated. He said farewell to his friends one by one until at last only the four H_obbits remained at his side. At the borders of the S_hire he, too, turned away. He left the H_obbits to settle with the S_hire, for the shattered pieces of evil still remaining in the world were no longer his concern, and went to talk to "moss gatherer" T_om B_ombadil.

What G_andalf did D_uring the next two years is unknown; it is possible that his "long talk" with B_ombadil was just that. At any rate, on September 29 3021, he met F_rodo at the G_rey Havens ready to take a White Ship over the sea to A_man. He wore N_arya openly on his finger, and S_hadowfax was beside him (perhaps even to take ship with him). His mission was over, and his homecoming after more than 2000 years was nigh. He bade farewell to S_amwise, M_erry, and P_ippin (the latter two of whom he had forewarned of the passage), then boarded the ship beside F_rodo, B_ilbo, E_lrond, and was never seen again in M_iddle-earth.[33] However, being a M_aiar, unlike the Elves who had no clear way to return from the U_ndying Lands, G_andalf could theoretically return to M_iddle-earth at any time if he wished.

The ship passed west upon the sea, and then took the hidden straight path to V_alinor: G_andalf became O_lórin once more. There, presumably, he dwells still in the gardens of I_rmo. O_lórin, the wisest of the M_aiar and the sole I_star to remain true to his mission, had successfully kindled the hearts of the free people in M_iddle-earth to overcome the evil of their time. In a large way, it was his victory.

Personality
G_andalf is often described in The Lord of the R_ings as quick to anger, and equally quick to laugh.[40] His deep wisdom and compassion clearly derived from the patience he learned in V_alinor, just as his care for all creatures of good will must have come from his strong sense of compassion for the weak. Both his patience and sense of kindness were revealed again and again, extending even to the servants of his enemies.

Keen observers of G_andalf often detected a veiled power, usually revealed in his eyes, which appeared deep and wise. He was alternately affectionate and brusque; he often surprised others with his bluntness when time was of the essence. G_andalf consistently upbraided foolish behaviour, but also richly rewarded those who acted with good intentions.

H_obbits appealed to him more than to the other Wizards, and he went often to the S_hire for respite from errands. His attachment was likely because the S_hire was of more bliss and peaceful than other inhabited realms of M_iddle-earth.

Appearance

G_andalf is described as an old man with a pointed blue hat, a long grey cloak, and a silver scarf. He had a long white beard and bushy eyebrows that stuck out beyond the brim of the hat. As one of the I_stari, his body of flesh was old in its appearance from the beginning, and though immortal and effectively ageless, G_andalf would often be noted to seemingly age further as time passed.

After he is resurrected, the change of his signature colour from grey to white is significant, for he was sent back to replace the corrupted head of the Order of Wizards and leader of the W_hite C_ouncil S_aruman as the Chief of the Order of Wizards. In the book, he says that he has himself become what S_aruman should have been.

C_írdan the Shipwright seemed to have foreseen this, for he entrusted the care of N_arya, the R_ing of Fire (one of the Three R_ings of the Elves) to G_andalf rather than S_aruman.

Powers & abilities
G_andalf was one of the wisest and most knowledgeable beings in M_iddle-earth, believed by G_aladriel to be more worthy than S_aruman in leading the W_hite C_ouncil, though he was less mighty in magic, until his resurrection. He had extensive knowledge of many languages and writing systems used in M_iddle-earth, as well as in the history and customs of several of its peoples. He considered himself the greatest scholar of H_obbit traditions. His long journeys allowed him to meet many influential and powerful individuals and form lasting bonds with them. The H_obbits knew him as a masterful crafter of firecrackers.

Outside of the S_hire, however, G_andalf the Grey was revered as one of the most powerful and wisest beings to tread M_iddle-earth, although he was wary of confronting S_aruman and S_auron directly as G_andalf the Grey, and admitted the latter was still more powerful after his rebirth. He was considered the most powerful member of the Fellowship of the R_ing, as well as, according to A_ragorn, its leader, not in small part thanks to his encyclopedic knowledge. His great intelligence allowed him to accurately guess the thoughts of others and made him perhaps the preeminent architect of S_auron's defeat. Moreover, G_andalf was skilled at telling men things that were true from a certain point of view, such as when he scammed Háma into allowing him to bring his staff before the king.

Armed with an Elven blade, G_andalf was as valiant a fighter as the other swordsmen in the Fellowship, in no way hindered by his elderly appearance when fighting or riding. G_andalf reaped Orcs and other servants of evil with his blade, and slew the B_alrog in a duel, though he perished as well. He is rendered even more formidable by his magic. G_andalf killed a squad of G_oblins with lightning D_uring the quest to slay S_maug, then hurled lightning and fire at the N_azgûl when he was attacked on W_eathertop—something noticed for miles around and that seared the battlefield. G_andalf described himself as "a servant of the Secret Fire, wielder of the flame of A_nor". Coincidentally, many of his spells were based on light and fire. He was able to ignite some wet wood with a touch of his staff, which he considered distinctive enough that any onlooker would recognize his handiwork. G_andalf purged the room of the Great G_oblin with blue glowing smoke which scattered piercing white sparks to kill the Orcs. He could cause the tip of his staff to glow with bright white light so as to see in the dark and increase the radiance at will, as demonstrated in M_oria. G_andalf could conjure sparks, such as to light pinecones on fire, and could choose any color for his flames. When fighting a pack of wolves, he set fire to all treetops on a hill with a single blazing branch, and the air became so hot that an arrow burned mid-flight. At the cost of shattering his staff, he was able to conjure a sea of white flames that caused the bridge under the feet of D_urin's Bane to crumble.

G_andalf the Grey has command over a great array of spells for all situations, such as magically healing wounds (though he stated E_lrond was a better healer), being able to enhance E_lrond's flood spell by giving the water the appearance of galloping knights, and seal doors shut or open them, although it should be noted that he was unable to open the Doors of D_urin prior to remembering the password. D_uring the B_attle of Five Armies, G_andalf amplified his voice to be heard by the armies of Men, Elves, and Dwarves. G_andalf could control the color and shape of smoke, such as to make a cloud of smoke float around himself. Moreover, G_andalf could manipulate the taste of beer, and he stated that D_urin's Bane nearly overpowered him with its counterspell, forcing him to rely on a word of Command that resulted in a blast which caused the ceiling of the room beyond the door to collapse. G_andalf also could make illusions such as when he covered B_ilbo's use of the O_ne R_ing at his party. G_andalf once had a comprehensive knowledge of Orc, Elf, and Manish magic, at least for the defending and locking of places, and while he had forgotten many of these spells by the time of the Great War of the R_ing, he still had a firm grasp of many.

G_andalf the White displayed these same powers, but more advanced and with a few more spells. When he first met A_ragorn, G_imli, and L_egolas in his new form, he shocked and quickly overpowered them with his agility and magic: he effortlessly disarmed the former two, one by causing his sword to burst into flames, the other by pulling the axe from his hands with a wave of his staff, and burnt the Elf's arrow into nothing when the latter loosed it. Shortly afterwards, he said that he had recently battled the Eye of S_auron to prevent him from locating F_rodo, and although successful, the confrontation left him spent. G_andalf's mere presence was frightening to those who were about him if the White Wizard willed it and his voice could stun weaker beings or cause them to hesitate. G_andalf the White could force others to obey his orders, as he demonstrated against G_imli and S_aruman. He also displayed the ability to communicate with horses and was able to reach S_hadowfax with his mind. G_andalf's control over lighting and shadows increased after his return, as he was able to strike down G_ríma W_ormtongue without really harming the man, just after conT_rolling the darkness in a whole room to remove the light as a show of power. He later displayed the ability to focus raw light (called the "white fire") into beams and blasts to drive off the R_ingwraiths and these attacks were so powerful that only the W_itch-king dared to duel G_andalf, using this spell caused G_andalf's eyes to glow. G_andalf also telekinetically disarmed D_enethor and was able to increase his physical strength, without needing to speak spells. Finally, he also shattered S_aruman’s staff, and thus stripped the rogue wizard of his divine/magical power, save the power of S_aruman's voice.

For all his power as G_andalf the White, he admitted that S_auron was still stronger and was unsure if he could defeat the W_itch-king, once the latter had been empowered for the assault on G_ondor.

G_andalf also displayed immense physical durability and endurance. D_uring his fight with D_urin's Bane, G_andalf survived a long fall into an icy lake, as well as burns from the B_alrog's flames. Afterwards, G_andalf still had the strength to chase the B_alrog up the Endless Stair, and ultimately defeat him, though at the cost of his own life.

As his unrestricted form, O_lórin, he likely had all his previous powers massively boosted, and the abilities to shapeshift and to travel at unfathomable speeds, among others. However, even this form seems to have restrictions, as the A_inur were said to have their power restricted upon descending to Earth.

Weapons
G_andalf primarily used his staff, but also carried a sword in combat. Sometimes D_uring combat, G_andalf would be seen wielding both weapons against his enemies.

Staff
Main article: Wizard Staff

G_andalf utilized his staff for various spells and abilities. He used it not just as a weapon, but a walking stick. He initially had an old wooden staff which he lost in the Mines of M_oria while fighting the B_alrog. He used a new one upon becoming G_andalf the White.

G_lamdring
Main article: G_lamdring

This was an Elven sword G_andalf found in a T_rolls' lair. From that point until the resolution of the War of the R_ing, he used this as a weapon to complement his staff, wielding them with equal skill. In many cases, he fought with both weapons at once.
