Siege of G_ondor
As a 'reward' for P_ippin, who had foolishly gazed into a p_alantír, G_andalf took the H_obbit with him to M_inas T_irith, the last bastion of the west. Soon after arriving, G_andalf confronted D_enethor II, the Ruling Steward, and learned that he was near despair over the death of his eldest son, B_oromir. P_ippin entered the Steward's service in payment of the debt that he and M_erry owed, the death of B_oromir. Ostensibly they were allies, but the Steward treated G_andalf with scorn and suspicion. When F_aramir, the Steward's younger son, returned from O_sgiliath and was attacked by N_azgûl, G_andalf upon S_hadowfax drove them away by revealing the power within him; later F_aramir told him that F_rodo and S_am were still alive and headed towards M_ordor.

M_inas T_irith was soon besieged by a vast force from M_ordor, led by the W_itch-king of A_ngmar. F_aramir having received a wound from a poisoned dart in the retreat from O_sgiliath, lay near death inside the Tower. Still, G_andalf encouraged the men of M_inas T_irith to have hope, and dispelled the fear of the R_ingwraiths by his very presence. But S_auron's catapults hurled flaming bolts upon the city; soon the first circle of the city burned unchecked. D_enethor now lost all heart as the city burned and his only remaining son hovered near death; he abandoned his leadership of the city. G_andalf then took it upon himself to direct the defense in cooperation with Prince I_mrahil of Dol A_mroth. When the gigantic ram G_rond destroyed M_inas T_irith's Great Gate, G_andalf placed himself alone at the ruined gateway. The W_itch-king then appeared in the midst of the blasted gate upon a black horse and threatened G_andalf with death; but G_andalf did not move — seated upon S_hadowfax he defied the mightiest of S_auron's minions. However, the stand-off ended inconclusively, as the morning arrived along with the host of the R_ohirrim. Hearing the horns of the Riders of R_ohan, the W_itch-king departed.

But G_andalf did not pursue his foe, for P_ippin brought him news that D_enethor was about to commit suicide in the Houses of the Dead, burning himself and his son F_aramir on a pyre like the heathen Kings of old. G_andalf rushed to stop this madness and was able to save F_aramir, but not D_enethor, whose despair and grief had overcome his mind. G_andalf also learned how it was that D_enethor's will had been broken: D_enethor clutched a p_alantír in his hands as he burned. Clearly D_enethor had been using the stone's special properties for some time — extending his vision far beyond those of men's eyes, but also wrestling in thought with S_auron. And even though S_auron could not completely overwhelm D_enethor's mind, his courage was daunted by knowledge of the vast might of M_ordor. Thus the shadow entered into the capital of G_ondor.

Nevertheless, and against all hope, the siege was broken. É_owyn of R_ohan and the H_obbit M_erry defeated the W_itch-king, whose last wail was heard by many as he was reduced to impotence. Soon after, A_ragorn arrived with a large valour of Men from the southern fiefs upon a captured Corsair fleet from U_mbar. The forces of the men of the west then utterly defeated S_auron's attack against M_inas T_irith, relieving the city and killing virtually all of the invaders. G_andalf's carefully laid plans and words of wisdom, along with acts of heroism not seen since the elder days, had defeated S_auron's first move.
