War of the R_ing
Upon returning to the S_hire, G_andalf immediately went to F_rodo and confirmed his suspicions by throwing the R_ing into F_rodo's hearth fire, which revealed, in B_lack Speech, the inscription upon the R_ing. G_andalf then told a dumbfounded F_rodo about the One R_ing and its history, and how S_auron would seek to regain it. Instructing F_rodo to go to R_ivendell with the R_ing, G_andalf told him to make arrangements to leave the S_hire quietly.

While in the S_hire, he had a sense of foreboding; in the aftermath of S_auron's assault on O_sgiliath, G_andalf heard disturbing news about war in G_ondor and a Black Shadow. He started wandering around Eriador, hearing news from the refugees who had a fear they could not speak about, until he met R_adagast the Brown who brought a message from S_aruman that he must seek him at once; and a warning that the R_ingwraiths were looking for the S_hire.[25] He went to The P_rancing Pony at B_ree. Believing that he would not be able to return to F_rodo in time, he wrote a letter, urging him to move as soon as possible for R_ivendell, and seek a "S_trider" whose real name was A_ragorn, along with a riddle to identify him; G_andalf would then try to catch up with them when available. He also instructed B_arliman B_utterbur to send the letter to H_obbiton and to expect a Mr. B_aggins that would come under the name of "Mr. U_nderhill". He left the inn, but B_arliman would forget to send the letter.[26]

S_aruman's betrayal
I keep a clearer memory of your arguments, and deeds, than you suppose. When last I visited you, you were the jailor of M_ordor, and there I was to be sent.
—G_andalf to S_aruman, The Lord of the R_ings, T_he Two Towers, Book Three, Ch. X: "The Voice of S_aruman"

Soon thereafter G_andalf arrived at I_sengard to consult with S_aruman. At their meeting, S_aruman finally revealed himself as "an ally, or servant of S_auron" and offered his "old friend and helper" two choices: to rule M_iddle-earth together with the Dark Lord or wield the R_ing's power for themselves. G_andalf refused "to submit to S_auron, or to [S_aruman]", and was imprisoned on the pinnacle of O_rthanc. G_andalf was aware that S_aruman would try to coerce the R_ing's whereabouts out of him and then hand him over to S_auron in M_ordor. But the Grey Pilgrim was saved from such a fate: G_waihir the Windlord, soon arrived and helped G_andalf escape. G_waihir's real purpose for visiting O_rthanc was to report a sighting of the N_azgûl, as R_adagast had appealed to him to do so earlier on. G_andalf knew he must return quickly to the S_hire, as F_rodo (and the R_ing) were in grave danger from both S_auron's chief agents: the N_azgûl and now S_aruman, who actually wanted the R_ing for himself.
