Return to the S_hire
D_uring this period G_andalf visited the S_hire frequently, especially his friend B_ilbo B_aggins, and his younger nephew, F_rodo. He noted B_ilbo's unusual youthfulness, despite his advancing age; the suspicious "magic r_ing" that B_ilbo had acquired D_uring his adventure began to weigh on his mind. G_andalf recalled the deceit B_ilbo used in originally claiming it for his own—B_ilbo had later admitted to stealing it from G_ollum. G_andalf could see that B_ilbo was now very preoccupied with the R_ing and had begun to suspect that the same was indeed a r_ing of power. Such un-H_obbitlike behaviour aroused his suspicions.

In 3001, B_ilbo planned what would become known as his Farewell Birthday Party, and at the culmination of the H_obbit's speech, B_ilbo put on the mysterious R_ing and disappeared, as a joke on his neighbors. Later as he was bidding farewell to G_andalf, who had known about his plans to leave, B_ilbo began to change his mind about leaving his R_ing to F_rodo, as he had earlier agreed. When G_andalf tried to persuade him to leave it, B_ilbo became hostile and accused G_andalf of trying to steal the R_ing for his own benefit, which he referred to as his "p_recious." Horrified by B_ilbo's outburst, G_andalf stood to his full height and projected his power, frightening the H_obbit. This brought B_ilbo back to his senses; he apologized, admitting that the R_ing had been troubling him lately, and begrudgingly left it behind. B_ilbo and G_andalf bid each other goodbye before B_ilbo left the S_hire for his journey.[23] Before leaving the S_hire, he spoke with F_rodo, emphatically warning him not to use the R_ing.[24]

Searching for the R_ing
Keen now to find out more about G_ollum, he sought A_ragorn's help to capture him. Studying the records in M_inas T_irith, he found the Scroll of I_sildur and pieced together the missing history of the One R_ing. In T_A 3017 on his way back to the S_hire he got word from the G_aladhrim that A_ragorn had finally captured G_ollum and he went to M_irkwood to meet him. For days he interrogated him in order to verify what he already suspected. A great fear came over him when he learned that G_ollum had been to the Tower of B_arad-dûr. S_auron had tortured G_ollum and learned not only of the "magic r_ing", but also the names "S_hire" and "B_aggins". G_andalf left M_irkwood soon after, and left G_ollum with the Wood-elves of Northern M_irkwood.[5] He now returned in haste to the S_hire, certain that F_rodo's ring was not simply a r_ing of power: it was the One Ruling R_ing of S_auron.
