Final deeds
In M_inas T_irith, G_andalf and the remaining members of the Fellowship reunited. At the coronation of King E_lessar, G_andalf (at A_ragorn's request) set the crown upon the King's head, and declared "Now come the days of the King, and may they be blessed while the thrones of the V_alar endure!". Thus G_andalf ushered in the new age of Men. Not long after G_andalf led A_ragorn to a high hallow on the upper slopes of M_indolluin and there they found a sapling of the W_hite Tree of G_ondor, a sign of the renewal that was to come.

After the coronation and wedding of A_ragorn to Arwen, G_andalf left with the rest of the remaining Fellowship on the journey home. For G_andalf, it was his last long journey in M_iddle-earth. His errand had been fulfilled; S_auron had been defeated. He said farewell to his friends one by one until at last only the four H_obbits remained at his side. At the borders of the S_hire he, too, turned away. He left the H_obbits to settle with the S_hire, for the shattered pieces of evil still remaining in the world were no longer his concern, and went to talk to "moss gatherer" T_om B_ombadil.

What G_andalf did During the next two years is unknown; it is possible that his "long talk" with B_ombadil was just that. At any rate, on September 29 3021, he met F_rodo at the G_rey Havens ready to take a White Ship over the sea to A_man. He wore N_arya openly on his finger, and S_hadowfax was beside him (perhaps even to take ship with him). His mission was over, and his homecoming after more than 2000 years was nigh. He bade farewell to S_amwise, M_erry, and P_ippin (the latter two of whom he had forewarned of the passage), then boarded the ship beside F_rodo, B_ilbo, E_lrond, and was never seen again in M_iddle-earth.[33] However, being a M_aiar, unlike the Elves who had no clear way to return from the U_ndying Lands, G_andalf could theoretically return to M_iddle-earth at any time if he wished.

The ship passed west upon the sea, and then took the hidden straight path to V_alinor: G_andalf became O_lórin once more. There, presumably, he dwells still in the gardens of I_rmo. O_lórin, the wisest of the M_aiar and the sole I_star to remain true to his mission, had successfully kindled the hearts of the free people in M_iddle-earth to overcome the evil of their time. In a large way, it was his victory.
