The War of the R_ing
G_ollum met and started following the Fellowship of the R_ing in M_oria and was spotted and heard by F_rodo on several occasions. On January 15, 3019, the Fellowship was divided when G_andalf disappeared while fighting a B_alrog (though he later returned). G_ollum continued trailing the remaining members. It is unknown how he crossed the broken Bridge of K_hazad-dûm, but he came with them to L_órien without their knowing. G_ollum followed their boats down A_nduin (floating on a log) to N_en Hithoel and pursued F_rodo and S_am across the E_myn Muil when they struck out on their own towards M_ordor. G_ollum followed them, but after a confrontation (in which he bit and nearly strangled S_am for the R_ing), F_rodo subdued him and threatened to kill him with S_ting, the Elvish blade that G_ollum had apparently recognized by its former owner - B_ilbo. S_am tied an elven-rope around G_ollum's neck for a leash, which inflicted great pain on G_ollum. Taking pity, F_rodo made G_ollum swear to help them. Agreeing to the oath, G_ollum swore by the "P_recious" itself as the R_ing was treacherous and would hold G_ollum to his word, so F_rodo released him to show them the way to M_ordor. The unlikely company, guided by G_ollum, made its way to the B_lack Gate of M_ordor.

Along the way, it was revealed that G_ollum, having lived in a cave for hundreds of years, feared both the Sun and the Moon, calling them the 'Yellow Face' and the 'White Face' respectively.

F_rodo's kindness brought out the "S_méagol" personality, and he made at least some effort to keep his promise. The two had a strange sort of bond from both having been R_ing-bearers; in G_ollum, F_rodo saw his possible future, and so wanted to save him so he could save himself. Apart from G_andalf and B_ilbo, F_rodo was the only person known to have shown kindness towards G_ollum, who was hated instantly by everyone he met, being perceived as filthy, slimy, sneaky and suspect by groups as different as the Orcs of C_irith Ungol and the Rangers of I_thilien.

When the B_lack Gate was reached and found to be well guarded, G_ollum convinced them not to go that way, saying that they would be caught and S_auron would regain the R_ing. G_ollum said he would lead them south, where he knew of another entrance into M_ordor, in which F_rodo complied, despite S_am's suspicions.

F_rodo and S_am were caught by F_aramir, and G_ollum followed them. When F_rodo allowed F_aramir to briefly take G_ollum prisoner, however, he felt betrayed, allowing the "G_ollum" personality to take total control. F_aramir found out that the place G_ollum was taking them was called C_irith Ungol. He then warned F_rodo and S_am of the evil of that place.

F_rodo, S_am, and G_ollum left F_aramir and began crossing the M_orgul Vale and proceeded to climb the Stairs of C_irith Ungol, in the border-mountains of the E_phel Dúath (Mountains of Shadow). G_ollum visited the great spider S_helob, child of U_ngoliant, because he was planning to betray the H_obbits by turning them to S_helob for food and then take the R_ing for himself. The fact that G_ollum managed to forge an alliance with S_helob is also remarkable, as she was otherwise known for devouring and killing everything on sight. When he returned, the H_obbits were asleep. The sight of F_rodo sleeping nearly moved G_ollum to repent, as he began to pet F_rodo's hair. However, S_am woke up and spoke harshly to G_ollum and all hope of redemption was lost. G_ollum followed through with his plan and led F_rodo and S_am into T_orech Ungol.

Just as F_aramir warned them, G_ollum did betray them, as after leading them into S_helob's lair, G_ollum disappeared and waited for S_helob to kill them so he could claim the R_ing for himself. When S_helob started chasing after F_rodo, G_ollum used this opportunity to attack S_am. However, he was no match for S_am, who gained the upper-hand, forcing G_ollum to retreat.

F_rodo and S_am escaped from her lair and also C_irith Ungol. They came against all odds to the fiery volcano M_ount Doom. G_ollum followed them all the way, seeking a chance to surprise them and take the R_ing. When F_rodo and S_am had almost reached their destination, he attacked, but failed to get the R_ing. S_am, who had hated G_ollum on sight, tried to bR_ing himself to kill him, but he relented out of sheer pity and disgust, turning his back on the beaten (but still wily) creature.
