Life under the M_isty Mountains

He lived in the M_isty Mountains for over four hundred years, living on raw blind fish (which he caught from his small boat), bats, and occasionally, stray Orcs. G_ollum even made a song about raw fish, which is "The rocks and stones! They're like old bones all bare of meat!" that he used as a riddle to B_ilbo, and would much later sing to F_rodo B_aggins in a longer version. He found H_obbit and Elven food repulsive.

D_uring his centuries under the R_ing's influence, he developed a sort of dissociative identity disorder: S_méagol, his "good" personality, still vaguely remembered things like friendship and love, while G_ollum, his "bad" and prevailing personality, was a slave to the R_ing and would kill anyone who tried to take it. Years later, S_amwise G_amgee would name the good personality "Slinker" (for his fawning, eager-to-please demeanor), and the bad personality "Stinker". The two personalities often quarreled when he talked to himself (as J_.R.R. T_olkien put it, "through not having anyone else to speak to") and had a love/hate relationship, mirroR_ing G_ollum's love and hatred for the R_ing and for himself.

G_ollum living in the M_isty Mountains

In July, T_A 2941, d_uring the Quest of E_rebor, the H_obbit B_ilbo B_aggins stumbled upon the dark lake on which he lived and found G_ollum's R_ing. G_ollum had lost the R_ing while squabbling with an imp goblin in the network of caves leading to the lake, though in fact it is more proper to say that the R_ing abandoned G_ollum, for it was known to have a will of its own. As G_andalf says later, it looks after itself, trying to get back to S_auron. After the infamous r_iddle-game, d_uring which G_ollum was unaware of his loss, G_ollum refused to show B_ilbo the promised way out and plotted to murder him. When he went to get his "birthday present," however, he found that it was gone. He suddenly realized the true answer to B_ilbo's last riddle—"W_hat have I got in my pocket?" -, breaking into a rage and then begun to chase him in the tunnels. B_ilbo inadvertently stumbled across the R_ing's power of invisibility as he ran, allowing him to follow G_ollum to the back entrance of the cave. There, B_ilbo at first thought to kill G_ollum, but was overcome with pity, so he jumped over him to escape. As B_ilbo ran, G_ollum cried out, "Thief! Thief, B_aggins! Curse it and crush it! We hates it forever!"; he did not immediately follow B_ilbo out of fear of being caught by the goblins, and so lingered in his cave.[2]

Search for the R_ing
G_ollum eventually left the Mountains and pursued B_ilbo a few years later, but the trail was cold. He made his way south to M_ordor where all evil was being drawn at the time, discovering the secret Stairs of C_irith Ungol located near M_inas M_orgul and surviving an encounter with S_helob. He was captured on his return, taken to the dungeons of B_arad-dûr and forced to reveal to S_auron under intense torture what he knew about the R_ing. G_ollum was then freed, as S_auron had learned all he needed from him and sensed he might draw out the R_ing. He was then subsequently caught by A_ragorn, then interrogated by G_andalf, who placed him in the care of the S_ilvan Elves living in T_hranduil's kingdom in M_irkwood. Assisted by Orcs, he escaped them, and set off looking for the S_hire. He passed through M_oria, but could not make it out of the Doors of D_urin. Seemingly, he then just waited there until he got lucky when the Fellowship of the R_ing passed through. However, as F_rodo was a R_ing-bearer, he might have foreseen the passing of the R_ing. Alternatively, some of Saruman's or S_auron's spies may have revealed to him the Fellowship was heading towards M_oria.[3]
