G_ollum, originally named S_méagol (or T_rahald), was a S_toor, one of the three early H_obbit-types in the T_hird Age. His given name of S_méagol should be pronounced as s_may-ah-gol.

By possessing the One R_ing, his life extended centuries beyond his nature, and he became deformed and twisted in body and mind by the corruption of the R_ing. He pursued the R_ing for many years after B_ilbo B_aggins found it in G_ollum's cave, within the M_isty Mountains, and took it away. Inadvertently, G_ollum would play a vital role in the ultimate Quest of M_ount Doom. The name G_ollum was derived from the sound of his gurgling, choking cough.

Originally a H_obbit of the S_toor-country, born in T_A 2430, S_méagol spent the early years of his life living with his extended family under a Matriarch, his grandmother. Around the year 2463, S_méagol became the fourth Bearer of the One R_ing, after S_auron, I_sildur, and D_éagol. D_éagol was his cousin, and on S_méagol's birthday, they went fishing in the G_ladden Fields. It was there that D_éagol found a gold R_ing in the water, after being pulled out of their boat by a large fish. Almost immediately, S_méagol fell to the power of the R_ing, demanding it as a birthday present. When D_éagol refused, S_méagol promptly flew into a rage and fought with D_éagol over the R_ing, choking him to death and taking the R_ing as his own. S_méagol was quickly corrupted further by the R_ing and banished by his people; turned by his grandmother out of her hole, he was forced to find a home in a cave in the M_isty Mountains in around T_A 2470. The R_ing's malignant influence twisted his H_obbit body, as well as his mind, and prolonged his life far beyond its natural limits. He called it his "P_recious" or his "birthday-present", the latter as a replacement in his mind for killing D_éagol, although he would spend the rest of his life being haunted over murdering D_éagol.[1]

Death
Moments later, F_rodo was standing on the edge of the C_racks of Doom, but, unable to destroy the R_ing, claimed it for himself and put it on. Then, G_ollum attacked the H_obbits again. He knocked out S_am with a rock whilst F_rodo was invisible, and then, tracking his footprints, jumped on F_rodo's shoulders. The two fought and G_ollum ultimately bit off F_rodo's finger with the R_ing on it.

Here, B_ilbo's long-ago kindness in sparing G_ollum's life was rewarded, as G_ollum then teetered on the edge of the great pit, overjoyed with finally reclaiming his "p_recious" until losing his balance and falling into the molten lava below while still holding the R_ing, causing his own death and, indirectly, the R_ing's utter destruction. Had B_ilbo taken G_ollum's life early on, the chance of S_auron's regaining the R_ing would have greatly increased as he knew where F_rodo was as soon as he put it on.

Legacy
F_rodo did forgive G_ollum, as G_andalf had pointed out to him that G_ollum was not an evil entity deserving death, but a pitiful being unnaturally and irreversibly bound to the R_ing's will, and that F_rodo would have almost certainly suffered a similar fate had he kept the R_ing.

Character
In the first edition of The H_obbit, T_olkien made no reference to his size, leading several illustrators to portray him as being very large. T_olkien realized the omission, and clarified in later editions that he was of average H_obbit size and in The Lord of the R_ings, there is a reference to S_am being "little less in height" than he is. T_olkien describes G_ollum as either dark, bone-white or sallow (pale yellow): at one point, the Rangers of I_thilien mistake his silhouette (seen from a distance) for a tailless black squirrel. G_orbag and S_hagrat describe him as a dark fellow. In a manuscript written to guide illustrators to the appearance of his characters, T_olkien explained this by saying that G_ollum had pale skin, but wore dark clothes and was often seen in poor light. The H_obbit states he has pockets, in which he keeps a tooth sharpening rock, goblin teeth, wet shells, and a scrap of bat wing. Despite these details, he is generally depicted wearing a loincloth or naked in illustrations and adaptations.

G_ollum was a very good survivor, and his keen eyed and quickness of hand made him an excellent fisherman. He could spot and catch fish in almost any level of light and water. He fished the waters of the M_isty Mountain's underground lake for centuries in almost complete darkness and almost anywhere he had to after leaving his cave in search of the R_ing and the "thief" B_aggins. He was known to eat almost anything that was living or edible and could stomach anything raw and uncooked. He was also very good at not being seen and was an excellent waterman, making use of anything that could float which made it possible for him to follow the Fellowship for so long.
