Descending from the M_isty Mountains, they survive an encounter with W_args (large evil wolves) and g_oblins by climbing trees. E_agles, summoned by G_andalf, then came to rescue them.  They soon meet Beorn, a man who can transform into a bear.  They depart, having rested for several days. G_andalf leaves soon on an errand. The party traverses the great forest, M_irkwood, eventually running out of supplies. G_andalf had warned them not to leave the Elf-path, but they saw fire and heard singing, so, hopeless, they leave the path to beg food from Wood-elves, only to get lost. They are captured by giant spiders, but B_ilbo rescues the Dwarves by becoming invisible via the R_ing and killing many spiders with S_ting and rocks. Elves then capture the Dwarves and imprison them, but B_ilbo manages to sneak into the Elvenking T_hranduil's palace unnoticed using the R_ing; he then helps the Dwarves escape in barrels floating down the river.

After staying for a short period of time at L_ake-town, the treasure-seekers proceed to the L_onely Mountain. Finding themselves unable to locate the secret door, the company sits down, depressed, on a cliff. Hearing a Thrush knocking on a stone, B_ilbo looks up just in time to see the last rays of the Sun of D_urin's Day, shining on the cliff wall, to magically reveal the secret door (as was foretold by moon-letters upon a map that the company was in possession of). B_ilbo is sent down to meet S_maug, the dragon, who realized the Company received help from the people of L_ake-town, and sets out to destroy it. However, the Thrush that had been knocking on the stone was no ordinary bird but of an ancient race with whom the Men of D_ale could communicate, and it had heard B_ilbo's report to the Dwarves; that S_maug had a bare patch in his armor on the left side of his chest (nearest his heart) that could be used to slaughter him, if only you could get close enough. It conveyed this message to one Bard the Bowman, who seeing the bare patch on the chest of S_maug, dispatched the dragon with a single black arrow, thus allowing the party of Dwarves to take possession of the treasure.

The citizens of L_ake-town arrive to make historical claims and demand compensation for the help they had rendered, as well as reparations for damage S_maug inflicted during his attack. They're joined by the Elves, who also demand a share based on historical claims. The Dwarves refuse all negotiations and in turn summon kin from the mountains to strengthen their position. Seeing no other way to avert a war, B_ilbo uses the R_ing to steal the prized A_rkenstone of T_hráin from the Dwarves, which he uses to broker peace. However, after revealing this to T_horin, the latter becomes furious and kicks him out. B_ilbo then leaves and joins the recently returned G_andalf and L_ake-Town citizens.

Just as a grudging truce is agreed to, the three armies at the L_onely Mountain (Elves, Men, and Dwarves) are attacked by G_oblins and W_args from the M_isty Mountains. A bitter battle ensues (named the B_attle of Five Armies). Though suffering heavy losses, Elves, Men, and Dwarves prevail with the help of the E_agles. T_horin, F_ili and K_ili are unfortunately killed in the battle, but just before he dies, T_horin makes peace with B_ilbo. The treasure is apportioned. B_ilbo refuses most of the riches, realizing he has no way to bring them back home; he nevertheless takes enough with him to make himself a wealthy h_obbit and live happily thereafter, unaware of the dangerous nature of his R_ing, which he places in a glass case on his mantle. G_andalf and B_alin later visit B_ilbo at B_ag-End.
