The H_obbit, or T_here and Back Again is the first published novel by J_.R.R. T_olkien set in M_iddle-earth. The book was first published on September 21, 1937 and is set in the years 2941 to 2942 of the T_hird Age before the events of The Lord of the R_ings.[1] Initially intended as a standalone story for children, it was later realigned more into the M_iddle-earth legendarium by 1951, when a revised edition was released.

Background
J_.R.R. T_olkien wrote The H_obbit (as well as the first two books of The Lord of the R_ings) during his time as a Fellow and Professor of Anglo-Saxon at Pembroke College of the University of Oxford in England.[2] T_olkien recollected in a 1955 letter to W.H. Auden[3] that The H_obbit began in the late 1920s when he was marking School Certificate papers and wrote the words "In a hole in the ground, there lived a h_obbit" on the back of one of them. The H_obbit didn't go any further than that at the time, although in the following years he drew up T_hrór's Map, outlining the geography of the tale. The story itself he wrote in the early 1930s, and it was eventually published because he lent it to the Rev. Mother of Cherwell Edge when she was sick with the flu, and while she had the manuscript it was seen by a former student who was employed in the office of A_llen & Unwin, a British publishing house.

T_olkien introduced or mentioned characters and places that figured prominently in his legendarium, specifically E_lrond and G_ondolin, along with elements from Germanic legend. But the decision that the events of The H_obbit and The Lord of the R_ings could belong to the same universe as The S_ilmarillion was made only after his initial success and the request by his publisher for a sequel.

Although a fairy tale, the book is both complex and sophisticated: it contains many names and words derived from Norse mythology, and central plot elements from the Beowulf epic, it makes use of Anglo-Saxon runes, information on calendars and moon phases, and detailed geographical descriptions that fit well with the accompanying maps.
