B_ilbo B_aggins, a h_obbit, smokes in his porch-way at B_ag End one day, when G_andalf the wizard visits him. After a lengthy discussion in which B_ilbo says "good morning" several times, B_ilbo becomes flustered. He invites G_andalf to tea, and goes back inside his H_obbit-hole with a final "good morning".  G_andalf stays outside, and before leaving, carves a secret mark on B_ilbo's front door that indiciates: "Burglar wants a good job, plenty of excitement and reasonable reward." Soon afterward, thirteen Dwarves (T_horin II O_akenshield, G_lóin, Ó_in, O_ri, N_ori, D_ori, D_walin, B_alin, F_íli and K_íli, B_ifur, B_ofur, and B_ombur) arrive at B_ag End and begin discussing their planned treasure hunt while the hapless B_ilbo provides obligatory hospitality. After the Dwarves and B_ilbo clean up the mess of their hefty supper, a map is produced and G_andalf arranges for B_ilbo to take the job of burglar. The company's quest is to use a secret door to enter the L_onely Mountain, send forth their burglar to steal as much of the riches within its halls as possible, and do reconnaissance, then, to slay the dragon S_maug who had claimed the Mountains, and become rich again.

The next morning, after oversleeping and nearly missing the start of the journey, B_ilbo goes off with the Dwarves. They are nearly eaten by 3 t_rolls, Tom, Bert, and William, but G_andalf manages to deceive the t_rolls into staying up all night whereupon they are turned into stone by the first light of dawn and die (the stone t_rolls appear later in The Fellowship of the R_ing). In the T_rolls' lair they find the t_rolls' storage of supplies, including several weapons. B_ilbo acquires an Elvish short sword which he will later name S_ting, which glows blue in the presence of Orcs. T_horin acquires O_rcrist, and G_andalf acquires G_lamdring.

The party travels to R_ivendell, where they enjoy the hospitality of Elves. There, E_lrond finds Moon-letters on the company's map of the mountain, giving information about a secret door on its side. They then proceed eastward toward the M_isty Mountains. There they are captured by g_oblins, and carried to G_oblin-town. They run away, and during the escape B_ilbo loses the Dwarves. Alone in the dark after running away from the g_oblins, B_ilbo finds a gold R_ing on the floor of a cave passage and puts it in his pocket. Little did he know that this was the One R_ing lost by S_auron centuries ago.

Continuing down a tunnel, he finds himself at the shore of an underground lake. G_ollum quietly paddles up in his boat, and the two enact the r_iddle-game, under the condition that if B_ilbo wins, G_ollum will show him the way out, but if B_ilbo loses, G_ollum will eat him. After several riddles, which each manages to answer, B_ilbo, whilst fiddling in his pocket unable to think of a riddle, asks himself aloud "W_hat have I got in my pocket?". G_ollum thinks this is supposed to be the next riddle, and as it doesn't comply with the rules of the r_iddle-game, demands three guesses; in the end he fails to guess the answer. B_ilbo demands his reward, but G_ollum refuses and paddles off in his boat to an island in the lake, upon which he lives. After searching around for a while asking aloud "Where is it? Where's my p_recious!?" to which B_ilbo replies, "I don't know and I don't care. I just want to get out of here", G_ollum becomes suspicious, gets in his boat, and starts paddling back across the lake towards B_ilbo. B_ilbo realizes his life is in danger and makes his escape down the maze of pitch-black tunnels, and G_ollum gives chase. B_ilbo trips, and finds the R_ing on his finger.  Realizing he has no chance to escape his pursuer, he stays where he is and prepares to meet his fate, but G_ollum runs right over him. B_ilbo realizes the R_ing, while on his finger, makes him invisible. He manages to escape past G_ollum, who has gone to guard the only exit, and finds his way to the surface where he rejoins the Dwarves.
