
In the meanwhile, the brave and loyal S_amwise G_amgee (who for a short time had himself become the R_ing-bearer) enables the long-suffering F_rodo B_aggins to navigate the barren wasteland of M_ordor. For part of the way, they are captured by a company of Orcs and must pretend to be Orcs before they are able to escape. The two H_obbits, tired and half-alive, finally reach the C_racks of Doom, where the One R_ing is destroyed along with G_ollum, freeing M_iddle-earth from S_auron's power forever. This happens when F_rodo at the last moment decides to keep the R_ing rather than destroy it, and is attacked by G_ollum who bites off F_rodo's finger to take the R_ing, trips, and falls into the lava while still holding the R_ing. F_rodo and S_am are rescued by the Great E_agles, whom G_andalf rides to M_ount Doom, from the B_lack Gate. After S_auron is defeated, his armies at the B_lack Gate flee, and the men of G_ondor and R_ohan are victorious in the battle.

A_ragorn is crowned King of G_ondor at M_inas T_irith. Waiting several months for the marriage of A_ragorn and A_rwen, the Fellowship of the R_ing then part for good on Dol B_aran, the H_obbits return home, only to find the S_hire under the control of 'S_harkey' who they find out is S_aruman, diminished in power but not in malevolence. M_erry and P_ippin, now experienced warriors of R_ohan and G_ondor respectively, take the lead in setting things right again, and lead an uprising of h_obbits against S_aruman, freeing the S_hire. Time passes. The S_hire heals, but F_rodo does not. Eventually F_rodo departs for the U_ndying Lands to find healing, along with B_ilbo B_aggins and the Keepers of the Three R_ings. S_am, M_erry and P_ippin watch them depart and return home in silence. S_am is greeted by his wife R_osie and his daughter E_lanor. In the last line of the book S_am says to R_osie; "Well, I'm back".

Chapters
I - The Tower of C_irith Ungol - S_am infiltrates the Orc fortress to find F_rodo.
II - The Land of Shadow - S_am and F_rodo make their way into M_ordor; they are captured by an Orc company, who mistake them for Orc deserters.
III - M_ount Doom - F_rodo and S_am reach M_ount Doom; the final battle for the R_ing between G_ollum and F_rodo.
IV - The Field of C_ormallen - Continuing from Book Five, chapter X; the Battle of the B_lack Gate begins, the Great E_agles arrive; Captains of the west victorious; F_rodo and S_am rescued by G_andalf; all the company meets again in I_thilien at the Field of C_ormallen.
V - The Steward and the King - chapter begins in M_inas T_irith at the H_ouses of Healing after the army departs for the B_lack Gate; É_owyn is taken to see F_aramir; M_erry is also recovering in M_inas T_irith but later leaves for C_ormallen. Later the army returns with A_ragorn, G_andalf and the four h_obbits; G_andalf crowns A_ragorn King of G_ondor; A_ragorn makes F_aramir Prince of I_thilien, who also keeps the office of Steward; G_andalf takes A_ragorn to Mount M_indolluin to survey the lands of his kingdom where they find a sapling of the W_hite Tree of G_ondor. On midsummer’s eve E_lrond, G_aladriel, A_rwen, C_eleborn and a party of Elves arrive in the city from the north; the wedding of A_ragorn and A_rwen.
VI - Many Partings - The company rides north to R_ohan, then I_sengard, where T_reebeard gives A_ragorn the Keys of O_rthanc. The Fellowship of the R_ing parts on Dol B_aran; G_imli and L_egolas head north through F_angorn Forest; A_ragorn returns to his kingdom; the rest of the company heads north where they meet S_aruman and W_ormtongue who were just released from I_sengard; G_aladriel, C_eleborn and the G_aladhrim leave over the pass of C_aradhras; the h_obbits and G_andalf then arrive in R_ivendell.
VII - Homeward Bound - The h_obbits and G_andalf travel to B_ree where they stay at The P_rancing Pony, and are told by B_utterbur that there has been trouble in B_ree while they have been away.
VIII - The Scouring of the S_hire - The h_obbits arrive in the S_hire to find it taken over by 'the Chief' or 'S_harkey' at B_ag End; Battle of B_ywater; the h_obbits find S_aruman and W_ormtongue at B_ag End; W_ormtongue kills S_aruman, and is then killed himself by h_obbit archers.
IX - The G_rey Havens - cleaning up of the S_hire; several years pass; S_am and F_rodo meet E_lrond and G_aladriel and B_ilbo travelling west through the S_hire; they travel to the G_rey Havens where they meet G_andalf, and M_erry and P_ippin arrive; F_rodo, B_ilbo, G_andalf and the Elves set sail to the west; S_am returns to R_osie and their daughter E_lanor at B_ag End.
