The H_obbit, or T_here and Back Again is the first published novel by J_.R.R. T_olkien set in M_iddle-earth. The book was first published on September 21, 1937 and is set in the years 2941 to 2942 of the T_hird Age before the events of The Lord of the R_ings.[1] Initially intended as a standalone story for children, it was later realigned more into the M_iddle-earth legendarium by 1951, when a revised edition was released.

Background
J_.R.R. T_olkien wrote The H_obbit (as well as the first two books of The Lord of the R_ings) during his time as a Fellow and Professor of Anglo-Saxon at Pembroke College of the University of Oxford in England.[2] T_olkien recollected in a 1955 letter to W.H. Auden[3] that The H_obbit began in the late 1920s when he was marking School Certificate papers and wrote the words "In a hole in the ground, there lived a h_obbit" on the back of one of them. The H_obbit didn't go any further than that at the time, although in the following years he drew up T_hrór's Map, outlining the geography of the tale. The story itself he wrote in the early 1930s, and it was eventually published because he lent it to the Rev. Mother of Cherwell Edge when she was sick with the flu, and while she had the manuscript it was seen by a former student who was employed in the office of A_llen & Unwin, a British publishing house.

T_olkien introduced or mentioned characters and places that figured prominently in his legendarium, specifically E_lrond and G_ondolin, along with elements from Germanic legend. But the decision that the events of The H_obbit and The Lord of the R_ings could belong to the same universe as The S_ilmarillion was made only after his initial success and the request by his publisher for a sequel.

Although a fairy tale, the book is both complex and sophisticated: it contains many names and words derived from Norse mythology, and central plot elements from the Beowulf epic, it makes use of Anglo-Saxon runes, information on calendars and moon phases, and detailed geographical descriptions that fit well with the accompanying maps.

Story
B_ilbo B_aggins, a h_obbit, smokes in his porch-way at B_ag End one day, when G_andalf the wizard visits him. After a lengthy discussion in which B_ilbo says "good morning" several times, B_ilbo becomes flustered. He invites G_andalf to tea, and goes back inside his H_obbit-hole with a final "good morning".  G_andalf stays outside, and before leaving, carves a secret mark on B_ilbo's front door that indiciates: "Burglar wants a good job, plenty of excitement and reasonable reward." Soon afterward, thirteen Dwarves (T_horin II O_akenshield, G_lóin, Ó_in, O_ri, N_ori, D_ori, D_walin, B_alin, F_íli and K_íli, B_ifur, B_ofur, and B_ombur) arrive at B_ag End and begin discussing their planned treasure hunt while the hapless B_ilbo provides obligatory hospitality. After the Dwarves and B_ilbo clean up the mess of their hefty supper, a map is produced and G_andalf arranges for B_ilbo to take the job of burglar. The company's quest is to use a secret door to enter the L_onely Mountain, send forth their burglar to steal as much of the riches within its halls as possible, and do reconnaissance, then, to slay the dragon S_maug who had claimed the Mountains, and become rich again.

The next morning, after oversleeping and nearly missing the start of the journey, B_ilbo goes off with the Dwarves. They are nearly eaten by 3 t_rolls, Tom, Bert, and William, but G_andalf manages to deceive the t_rolls into staying up all night whereupon they are turned into stone by the first light of dawn and die (the stone t_rolls appear later in The Fellowship of the R_ing). In the T_rolls' lair they find the t_rolls' storage of supplies, including several weapons. B_ilbo acquires an Elvish short sword which he will later name S_ting, which glows blue in the presence of Orcs. T_horin acquires O_rcrist, and G_andalf acquires G_lamdring.

The party travels to R_ivendell, where they enjoy the hospitality of Elves. There, E_lrond finds Moon-letters on the company's map of the mountain, giving information about a secret door on its side. They then proceed eastward toward the M_isty Mountains. There they are captured by g_oblins, and carried to G_oblin-town. They run away, and during the escape B_ilbo loses the Dwarves. Alone in the dark after running away from the g_oblins, B_ilbo finds a gold R_ing on the floor of a cave passage and puts it in his pocket. Little did he know that this was the One R_ing lost by S_auron centuries ago.

Continuing down a tunnel, he finds himself at the shore of an underground lake. G_ollum quietly paddles up in his boat, and the two enact the r_iddle-game, under the condition that if B_ilbo wins, G_ollum will show him the way out, but if B_ilbo loses, G_ollum will eat him. After several riddles, which each manages to answer, B_ilbo, whilst fiddling in his pocket unable to think of a riddle, asks himself aloud "W_hat have I got in my pocket?". G_ollum thinks this is supposed to be the next riddle, and as it doesn't comply with the rules of the r_iddle-game, demands three guesses; in the end he fails to guess the answer. B_ilbo demands his reward, but G_ollum refuses and paddles off in his boat to an island in the lake, upon which he lives. After searching around for a while asking aloud "Where is it? Where's my p_recious!?" to which B_ilbo replies, "I don't know and I don't care. I just want to get out of here", G_ollum becomes suspicious, gets in his boat, and starts paddling back across the lake towards B_ilbo. B_ilbo realizes his life is in danger and makes his escape down the maze of pitch-black tunnels, and G_ollum gives chase. B_ilbo trips, and finds the R_ing on his finger.  Realizing he has no chance to escape his pursuer, he stays where he is and prepares to meet his fate, but G_ollum runs right over him. B_ilbo realizes the R_ing, while on his finger, makes him invisible. He manages to escape past G_ollum, who has gone to guard the only exit, and finds his way to the surface where he rejoins the Dwarves.

Descending from the M_isty Mountains, they survive an encounter with W_args (large evil wolves) and g_oblins by climbing trees. E_agles, summoned by G_andalf, then came to rescue them.  They soon meet Beorn, a man who can transform into a bear.  They depart, having rested for several days. G_andalf leaves soon on an errand. The party traverses the great forest, M_irkwood, eventually running out of supplies. G_andalf had warned them not to leave the Elf-path, but they saw fire and heard singing, so, hopeless, they leave the path to beg food from Wood-elves, only to get lost. They are captured by giant spiders, but B_ilbo rescues the Dwarves by becoming invisible via the R_ing and killing many spiders with S_ting and rocks. Elves then capture the Dwarves and imprison them, but B_ilbo manages to sneak into the Elvenking T_hranduil's palace unnoticed using the R_ing; he then helps the Dwarves escape in barrels floating down the river.

After staying for a short period of time at L_ake-town, the treasure-seekers proceed to the L_onely Mountain. Finding themselves unable to locate the secret door, the company sits down, depressed, on a cliff. Hearing a Thrush knocking on a stone, B_ilbo looks up just in time to see the last rays of the Sun of D_urin's Day, shining on the cliff wall, to magically reveal the secret door (as was foretold by moon-letters upon a map that the company was in possession of). B_ilbo is sent down to meet S_maug, the dragon, who realized the Company received help from the people of L_ake-town, and sets out to destroy it. However, the Thrush that had been knocking on the stone was no ordinary bird but of an ancient race with whom the Men of D_ale could communicate, and it had heard B_ilbo's report to the Dwarves; that S_maug had a bare patch in his armor on the left side of his chest (nearest his heart) that could be used to slaughter him, if only you could get close enough. It conveyed this message to one Bard the Bowman, who seeing the bare patch on the chest of S_maug, dispatched the dragon with a single black arrow, thus allowing the party of Dwarves to take possession of the treasure.

The citizens of L_ake-town arrive to make historical claims and demand compensation for the help they had rendered, as well as reparations for damage S_maug inflicted during his attack. They're joined by the Elves, who also demand a share based on historical claims. The Dwarves refuse all negotiations and in turn summon kin from the mountains to strengthen their position. Seeing no other way to avert a war, B_ilbo uses the R_ing to steal the prized A_rkenstone of T_hráin from the Dwarves, which he uses to broker peace. However, after revealing this to T_horin, the latter becomes furious and kicks him out. B_ilbo then leaves and joins the recently returned G_andalf and L_ake-Town citizens.

Just as a grudging truce is agreed to, the three armies at the L_onely Mountain (Elves, Men, and Dwarves) are attacked by G_oblins and W_args from the M_isty Mountains. A bitter battle ensues (named the B_attle of Five Armies). Though suffering heavy losses, Elves, Men, and Dwarves prevail with the help of the E_agles. T_horin, F_ili and K_ili are unfortunately killed in the battle, but just before he dies, T_horin makes peace with B_ilbo. The treasure is apportioned. B_ilbo refuses most of the riches, realizing he has no way to bring them back home; he nevertheless takes enough with him to make himself a wealthy h_obbit and live happily thereafter, unaware of the dangerous nature of his R_ing, which he places in a glass case on his mantle. G_andalf and B_alin later visit B_ilbo at B_ag-End.
