The R_eturn of the King: Being the Third Part of The Lord of the R_ings is a novel written by J_.R.R. T_olkien. It concludes the story told in The Fellowship of the R_ing and The T_wo Towers.

Title
T_olkien conceived of The Lord of the R_ings as a single volume comprising six sections he called "books" and extensive appendices. The original publisher, A_llen & Unwin made the decision to split the work into three parts, publishing the fifth and sixth books and the appendices under the title The R_eturn of the King, in reference to A_ragorn's assumption of the throne. T_olkien indicated he would have preferred The War of the R_ing as a title, as it gave away less of the story.

Structure
The structure of The R_eturn of the King mirrors somewhat that of The T_wo Towers in that the first section recounts the various adventures of several characters including a massive battle, and the second section resumes the quest of the R_ing-bearers.

Contents
Book V: The War of the R_ing

The story begins as G_andalf delivers news to D_enethor, Steward of G_ondor, that war is imminent. G_andalf br_ings P_ippin with him, who enters the service of the Steward. A_ragorn, by his courage and leadership, proves himself a worthy ruler of Men. He is destined to find a lost army of men, now dead yet entrapped in a curse set forth long ago by their own disobedience, in the place known as the Paths of the Dead. The remnants of the Fellowship lead the forces of G_ondor and R_ohan in defence of G_ondor's capital city, M_inas T_irith, resulting in the epic Battle of the P_elennor Fields. Those characters who manage to survive the battle are led by A_ragorn on an assuredly suicidal feint-attack against the B_lack Gate of M_ordor, partly to distract S_auron from guarding his other borders so that F_rodo and S_am can gain a clear passage into M_ordor. The Army of the West stands before the B_lack Gates of the M_orannon exchanging idle words with the Mouth of S_auron.

Chapters
I - M_inas T_irith - G_andalf and P_ippin arrive in M_inas T_irith; they talk with D_enethor; P_ippin enters the service of the steward.
II - The Passing of the Grey Company - Follows A_ragorn, L_egolas and G_imli as they pass through the Paths of the Dead between R_ohan and G_ondor.
III - The Muster of R_ohan - R_ohan prepares for war; M_erry heads off for M_inas T_irith, on a horse with a rider who calls himself D_ernhelm.
IV - The Siege of G_ondor - Back to G_andalf and P_ippin, and the preparations of the city of M_inas T_irith for the attack by the armies of M_ordor; the defenses at O_sgiliath and the C_auseway Forts are breached, M_inas T_irith is besieged; the chapter ends with M_inas T_irith's Great Gate broken, and the army of R_ohan finally arriving.
V - The Ride of the R_ohirrim - The R_ohirrim pass through the D_rúadan Forest with the aid of the D_rúedain who live there, who are led by G_hân-buri-Ghân; the army arrives at M_inas T_irith.
VI - The Battle of the P_elennor Fields - Armies of R_ohan and G_ondor fight the armies of M_ordor, R_hûn and H_arad in the Battle of the P_elennor Fields; M_erry and É_owyn together kill the Lord of the N_azgûl, the W_itch-king of A_ngmar. A_ragorn arrives with an army from southern G_ondor, the forces of M_ordor are heavily defeated.
VII - The Pyre of D_enethor - D_enethor goes mad and tries to burn F_aramir alive (believing him to be doomed); he is saved by G_andalf; D_enethor then sets fire to himself. They discover that D_enethor has been using a p_alantír.
VIII - The H_ouses of Healing - M_erry, F_aramir, É_owyn and many others are injured and placed in the H_ouses of Healing; A_ragorn uses kingsfoil to help treat the injured.
IX - The Last Debate - G_imli and L_egolas meet M_erry and P_ippin again; the Captains of the West hold a counsel on their next action; they decide to send 7000 men against M_ordor to march on the B_lack Gate.
X - The B_lack Gate Opens - The army, with G_andalf, A_ragorn, G_imli, L_egolas and P_ippin (but not M_erry) marches to the B_lack Gate. The Mouth of S_auron comes out to discuss terms, and presents tokens, which were owned by F_rodo; he then departs and the army of M_ordor attacks them.
Book VI: The End of the T_hird Age/The R_eturn of the King

In the meanwhile, the brave and loyal S_amwise G_amgee (who for a short time had himself become the R_ing-bearer) enables the long-suffering F_rodo B_aggins to navigate the barren wasteland of M_ordor. For part of the way, they are captured by a company of Orcs and must pretend to be Orcs before they are able to escape. The two H_obbits, tired and half-alive, finally reach the C_racks of Doom, where the One R_ing is destroyed along with G_ollum, freeing Middle-earth from S_auron's power forever. This happens when F_rodo at the last moment decides to keep the R_ing rather than destroy it, and is attacked by G_ollum who bites off F_rodo's finger to take the R_ing, trips, and falls into the lava while still holding the R_ing. F_rodo and S_am are rescued by the Great E_agles, whom G_andalf rides to M_ount Doom, from the B_lack Gate. After S_auron is defeated, his armies at the B_lack Gate flee, and the men of G_ondor and R_ohan are victorious in the battle.

A_ragorn is crowned King of G_ondor at M_inas T_irith. Waiting several months for the marriage of A_ragorn and A_rwen, the Fellowship of the R_ing then part for good on Dol B_aran, the H_obbits return home, only to find the S_hire under the control of 'S_harkey' who they find out is S_aruman, diminished in power but not in malevolence. M_erry and P_ippin, now experienced warriors of R_ohan and G_ondor respectively, take the lead in setting things right again, and lead an uprising of h_obbits against S_aruman, freeing the S_hire. Time passes. The S_hire heals, but F_rodo does not. Eventually F_rodo departs for the U_ndying Lands to find healing, along with B_ilbo B_aggins and the Keepers of the Three R_ings. S_am, M_erry and P_ippin watch them depart and return home in silence. S_am is greeted by his wife R_osie and his daughter E_lanor. In the last line of the book S_am says to R_osie; "Well, I'm back".

Chapters
I - The Tower of C_irith Ungol - S_am infiltrates the Orc fortress to find F_rodo.
II - The Land of Shadow - S_am and F_rodo make their way into M_ordor; they are captured by an Orc company, who mistake them for Orc deserters.
III - M_ount Doom - F_rodo and S_am reach M_ount Doom; the final battle for the R_ing between G_ollum and F_rodo.
IV - The Field of C_ormallen - Continuing from Book Five, chapter X; the Battle of the B_lack Gate begins, the Great E_agles arrive; Captains of the west victorious; F_rodo and S_am rescued by G_andalf; all the company meets again in I_thilien at the Field of C_ormallen.
V - The Steward and the King - chapter begins in M_inas T_irith at the H_ouses of Healing after the army departs for the B_lack Gate; É_owyn is taken to see F_aramir; M_erry is also recovering in M_inas T_irith but later leaves for C_ormallen. Later the army returns with A_ragorn, G_andalf and the four h_obbits; G_andalf crowns A_ragorn King of G_ondor; A_ragorn makes F_aramir Prince of I_thilien, who also keeps the office of Steward; G_andalf takes A_ragorn to Mount M_indolluin to survey the lands of his kingdom where they find a sapling of the W_hite Tree of G_ondor. On midsummer’s eve E_lrond, G_aladriel, A_rwen, C_eleborn and a party of Elves arrive in the city from the north; the wedding of A_ragorn and A_rwen.
VI - Many Partings - The company rides north to R_ohan, then I_sengard, where T_reebeard gives A_ragorn the Keys of O_rthanc. The Fellowship of the R_ing parts on Dol B_aran; G_imli and L_egolas head north through F_angorn Forest; A_ragorn returns to his kingdom; the rest of the company heads north where they meet S_aruman and W_ormtongue who were just released from I_sengard; G_aladriel, C_eleborn and the G_aladhrim leave over the pass of C_aradhras; the h_obbits and G_andalf then arrive in R_ivendell.
VII - Homeward Bound - The h_obbits and G_andalf travel to B_ree where they stay at The P_rancing Pony, and are told by B_utterbur that there has been trouble in B_ree while they have been away.
VIII - The Scouring of the S_hire - The h_obbits arrive in the S_hire to find it taken over by 'the Chief' or 'S_harkey' at B_ag End; Battle of B_ywater; the h_obbits find S_aruman and W_ormtongue at B_ag End; W_ormtongue kills S_aruman, and is then killed himself by h_obbit archers.
IX - The G_rey Havens - cleaning up of the S_hire; several years pass; S_am and F_rodo meet E_lrond and G_aladriel and B_ilbo travelling west through the S_hire; they travel to the G_rey Havens where they meet G_andalf, and M_erry and P_ippin arrive; F_rodo, B_ilbo, G_andalf and the Elves set sail to the west; S_am returns to R_osie and their daughter E_lanor at B_ag End.
