The T_wo Towers: Being the Second Part of The Lord of the R_ings is a novel written by J_.R.R. T_olkien. It is preceded by The Fellowship of the R_ing and followed by The R_eturn of the King.

T_olkien came up with the title under deadline pressure and later expressed dissatisfaction with it. In letters and one sketch, he considered several possible sets of towers, including M_inas T_irith and B_arad-dûr, and even the possibility of leaving the matter ambiguous. However, he eventually settled on O_rthanc and M_inas M_orgul and wrote a note to this effect which appears at the end of most editions of The Fellowship of the R_ing. He also produced a final cover illustration showing these towers, but the publisher decided not to use it in order to save money on the production costs.

Loosely, any pair from a set of six towers in the story could plausibly fit the title: C_irith Ungol, O_rthanc, M_inas T_irith, B_arad-dûr, M_inas M_orgul, and the H_ornburg.

Structure
Because The T_wo Towers is the central portion of a longer work, its structure differs from that of a conventional novel. It begins and ends abruptly, without introduction to the characters, explanations of major plot elements or a satisfying conclusion. The first section follows the divergent paths of several important figures from The Fellowship of the R_ing, but tells nothing of its central character, on whose fate so much depends, enabling the reader to share in the suspense and uncertainty of the characters themselves. The narrative of the second part returns to the hero's quest to destroy the evil that threatens the world. While the first section tells of an epic battle, the struggles in much of the second are internal.

Contents
Book III: The Treason of I_sengard

The H_obbits M_erry and P_ippin escape from the Orcs who captured them when the Orcs themselves are attacked by the Riders of R_ohan. M_erry and P_ippin head into nearby F_angorn Forest where they encounter treelike giants called E_nts.

The forest generally keep to themselves, but are moved to oppose the menace posed to the trees by the wizard S_aruman, who has been chopping down trees in the forest to fuel fires for his furnaces.

A_ragorn, G_imli the Dwarf, and L_egolas the Elf, tracking M_erry and P_ippin, come across É_omer of R_ohan and his riders who tell them that they attacked the Orcs the previous night and left no survivors. However, A_ragorn is able to find small prints and they follow these into F_angorn, where they meet a white wizard who they at first believe to be S_aruman, but who turns out to be their wizard friend G_andalf, whom they believed had perished in the mines of M_oria. He tells them of his fall into the abyss, his battle to the death with the B_alrog and his reawakening. The four ride to E_doras and persuade King T_héoden that his people are in danger. In the process, S_aruman's agent in E_doras, G_ríma W_ormtongue, is expelled. A_ragorn, G_imli and L_egolas then travel to the defensive fortification of the H_ornburg, while G_andalf goes north in search of E_rkenbrand's men to br_ing as reinforcements. At the H_ornburg, they resist an onslaught of Orcs and Men sent by S_aruman, and G_andalf arrives the next morning with the W_estfold army led by E_rkenbrand just in time. The fleeing Orcs run into a forest of H_uorns; half-tree, half-ent creatures and none escape. A_ragorn, G_imli, L_egolas, T_héoden, É_omer, G_andalf and some guards then head to S_aruman's stronghold, I_sengard. There, they reunite with M_erry and P_ippin and find the fortress overrun by E_nts, who had flooded it with the nearby river and besieged O_rthanc, where S_aruman hid in refuge. After giving S_aruman a chance to repent, G_andalf casts him out of the order of wizards. W_ormtongue throws something from a window at G_andalf and those with him. This turns out to be one of the p_alantíri. P_ippin, unable to resist the urge, looks into it and has an encounter with S_auron. G_andalf and P_ippin then head for M_inas T_irith in preparation for the upcoming war.
