
Chapters
I - The Departure of B_oromir - A_ragorn finds B_oromir hit with many arrows, who tells him that Orcs took M_erry and P_ippin, and that they were still alive. B_oromir dies, and his body is set down over the Falls of R_auros on a 'funeral boat'; A_ragorn, L_egolas and G_imli decide to follow the Orcs who had captured M_erry and P_ippin, rather than following F_rodo and S_am. The three of them set off to chase the Orcs.
II - The Riders of R_ohan - They follow the trail of the Orcs and find several clues as to what happened with the h_obbits, then meet an é_ored of R_ohirrim led by É_omer, who tell them that the Orcs were destroyed and none were left alive. They camp near the site of the Orc massacre.
III - The U_ruk-h_ai - This chapter begins further back in time, telling the story of M_erry and P_ippin being captured by the Orcs, who are led by U_glúk from S_aruman's army, and G_rishnákh from M_ordor. The two parties of Orcs argue constantly. The Orcs camp near F_angorn Forest and G_rishnákh attempts to take the h_obbits away with him. The h_obbits escape as G_rishnákh is killed by an arrow. They flee into F_angorn Forest as the men of R_ohan attack the Orcs.
IV - T_reebeard - M_erry and P_ippin meet T_reebeard the E_nt, who calls an E_ntmoot, a gather_ing of E_nts in Derndingle. The h_obbits meet another E_nt, Q_uickbeam. After three days of deliberation, the E_nts decide at the E_ntmoot to attack I_sengard.
V - The W_hite Rider - The chapter goes back to the story of A_ragorn, L_egolas and G_imli, who discover signs that the h_obbits escaped the Orcs into the forest. They meet an old man, who they at first presume to be S_aruman, but who turns out to be G_andalf. They set off for E_doras.
VI - The King of the Golden Hall - The four of them reach E_doras and talk with King T_héoden. G_ríma W_ormtongue is expelled. T_héoden gives G_andalf the horse S_hadowfax.
VII - H_elm's Deep - A_ragorn, L_egolas and G_imli are at the H_ornburg with the R_ohirrim, defending the people of R_ohan from attack by the army of S_aruman. The Battle of the H_ornburg is fought and won.
VIII - The Road to I_sengard - They travel to I_sengard, and see that it has been destroyed. At I_sengard they find M_erry and P_ippin.
IX - Flotsam and Jetsam - M_erry and P_ippin tell the story of how the E_nts attacked I_sengard, in amongst the ruins or 'flotsam and jetsam' of the fortress.
X - The Voice of S_aruman - S_aruman has a very persuasive voice, which he almost uses to persuade T_héoden and the others until G_andalf casts him from the order of wizards. W_ormtongue throws the p_alantír of O_rthanc from the tower, which misses G_andalf, and is picked up by P_ippin.
XI - The P_alantir - P_ippin looks into the p_alantír and is seen by S_auron. G_andalf explains the origin of the p_alantír; G_andalf sets off with P_ippin for M_inas T_irith, riding on S_hadowfax.
Book IV: The Journey of the R_ingbearers / The R_ing Goes East
F_rodo and S_am discover G_ollum stalking them as they try to reach M_ount Doom to destroy the One R_ing. G_ollum hopes to reclaim the R_ing. S_am loathes and distrusts him, but F_rodo pities him. G_ollum promises to lead them to a secret entrance to M_ordor and for a time appears to be a true ally. They first stop at the B_lack Gate of M_ordor, where G_ollum persuades them not to go in, where they would surely be caught. They head south into I_thilien, and are captured by F_aramir, the brother of B_oromir. F_aramir learns from F_rodo of his brother's death and the plan to destroy the R_ing, and eventually allows them to go on their way. G_ollum leads them up the stairs of C_irith Ungol away from M_inas M_orgul and into the lair of S_helob, an enormous spider-like creature, who inflicts her poisonous bite on F_rodo. S_am resolves to finish the quest himself and takes the R_ing. However, when Orcs take F_rodo's body, he follows them and learns that F_rodo is not dead but unconscious and now their prisoner. The last line of the book is "F_rodo was alive but taken by the enemy."

Chapters
I - The Taming of S_méagol - G_ollum joins F_rodo and S_am, after S_am captures him.
II - The Passage of the Marshes - They pass through the D_ead Marshes.
III - The B_lack Gate is Closed - They reach the B_lack Gate, G_ollum persuades them not to go in, and they head south.
IV - Of Herbs and Stewed Rabbit - They reach the pleasant country of I_thilien. The title refers to the rabbits G_ollum catches that S_am cooks; the smoke from the fire causes them to be seen by men of G_ondor led by F_aramir, and they witness an ambush on a H_aradrim army, and an O_liphaunt.
V - The Window on the West - F_rodo and S_am are captured by F_aramir's men and they are blindfolded on their way to H_enneth Annûn. F_rodo and F_aramir discuss B_oromir's death.
VI - The F_orbidden Pool - F_aramir shows F_rodo they have found G_ollum at the F_orbidden Pool. F_rodo saves him from being shot by F_aramir's men.
VII - Journey to the Cross-roads - F_rodo, S_am and G_ollum leave F_aramir. They travel to the Cross-roads of the Fallen King where the M_orgul-road between O_sgiliath and M_inas M_orgul intersects with the H_arad Road.
VIII - The Stairs of C_irith Ungol - They witness an army, led by the W_itch-king of A_ngmar, leaving M_inas M_orgul and climb up the stairs.
IX - S_helob's Lair - G_ollum betrays F_rodo and S_am as they encounter with S_helob the spider.
X - The Choices of Master S_amwise - F_rodo is taken by the Orcs. S_am listens to the Orcs talking about him, which is how he finds out that he is still alive (he had thought that S_helob had killed F_rodo).
