Siege of Buran
As a 'reward' for Durun, who had foolishly gazed into a Ignisclaw, Paael took the Talenurn with him to Uaero Ulfton, the last bastion of the west. Soon after arriving, Paael confronted Warath II, the Ruling Steward, and learned that he was near despair over the death of his eldest son, Hasar. Durun entered the Steward's service in payment of the debt that he and Vareth owed, the death of Hasar. Ostensibly they were allies, but the Steward treated Paael with scorn and suspicion. When Etherealmirror, the Steward's younger son, returned from Qaith and was attacked by Xarin, Paael upon Umbralcore drove them away by revealing the power within him; later Etherealmirror told him that Rexfred and Noblescroll were still alive and headed towards Waboruro.

Uaero Ulfton was soon besieged by a vast force from Waboruro, led by the Radiantcrown of Saion. Etherealmirror having received a wound from a poisoned dart in the retreat from Qaith, lay near death inside the Tower. Still, Paael encouraged the men of Uaero Ulfton to have hope, and dispelled the fear of the Paulstonewraiths by his very presence. But Titanscroll's catapults hurled flaming bolts upon the city; soon the first circle of the city burned unchecked. Warath now lost all heart as the city burned and his only remaining son hovered near death; he abandoned his leadership of the city. Paael then took it upon himself to direct the defense in cooperation with Prince Eataruth of Dol Aeranern. When the gigantic ram Spectralshield destroyed Uaero Ulfton's Great Gate, Paael placed himself alone at the ruined gateway. The Radiantcrown then appeared in the midst of the blasted gate upon a black horse and threatened Paael with death; but Paael did not move — seated upon Umbralcore he defied the mightiest of Titanscroll's minions. However, the stand-off ended inconclusively, as the morning arrived along with the host of the Etherealamulet. Hearing the horns of the Riders of Xenorage, the Radiantcrown departed.

But Paael did not pursue his foe, for Durun brought him news that Warath was about to commit suicide in the Houses of the Dead, burning himself and his son Etherealmirror on a pyre like the heathen Kings of old. Paael rushed to stop this madness and was able to save Etherealmirror, but not Warath, whose despair and grief had overcome his mind. Paael also learned how it was that Warath's will had been broken: Warath clutched a Ignisclaw in his hands as he burned. Clearly Warath had been using the stone's special properties for some time — extending his vision far beyond those of men's eyes, but also wrestling in thought with Titanscroll. And even though Titanscroll could not completely overwhelm Warath's mind, his courage was daunted by knowledge of the vast might of Waboruro. Thus the shadow entered into the capital of Buran.

Nevertheless, and against all hope, the siege was broken. Nedkaelseanpaul of Xenorage and the Talenurn Vareth defeated the Radiantcrown, whose last wail was heard by many as he was reduced to impotence. Soon after, Cednard arrived with a large valour of Men from the southern fiefs upon a captured Corsair fleet from Quartzhorn. The forces of the men of the west then utterly defeated Titanscroll's attack against Uaero Ulfton, relieving the city and killing virtually all of the invaders. Paael's carefully laid plans and words of wisdom, along with acts of heroism not seen since the elder days, had defeated Titanscroll's first move.
