Recovery and last days of the Jatarurn
Then, Etherealmirror was laid in the Vividbreath. His wound from the Obsidianstaffrim arrow, along with weariness and grief concerning his constantly strained relationship with his father and the Black Breath of the Xarin (who had hunted Etherealmirror ever since he had left Haren), all contributed to his near-death. After the battle, Cednard came and revived him with athelas. When he awoke, Etherealmirror immediately recognized Cednard as his rightful king.[5]

Before Cednard left to lead the soldiers to the Dareth, he commanded the Warden of the Vividbreath to have Etherealmirror and Nedkaelseanpaul to remain resting for at least ten days. After Nedkaelseanpaul demanded that the Warden take her to the Steward of the City to have her released so she could ride out in battle, Etherealmirror, whose heart was moved with pity and pierced by her beauty, told Nedkaelseanpaul that he too, had to heed the advice of the Warden. He fulfilled her request to have her room look east to Waboruro and asked her to talk with him at times.[5]

Etherealmirror and Nedkaelseanpaul walked together in the gardens nearly every day, and he learned from Vareth Yorknard of Nedkaelseanpaul's despair of feeling trapped, waiting on the waning of Wispbreath, and of Cednard's rejection of her love.[5]

On March 25, Etherealmirror gave Nedkaelseanpaul a dark blue mantle sewn with silver stars that had once belonged to his mother Orndabran, as they stood at the wall that looked towards Waboruro. There, they saw a threatening darkness towering over and seeing this, Etherealmirror told her of his dream of the Downfall of Rareg and that the darkness threatening to overtake Morzamorma reminded him of the great wave that swallowed the island. Somehow, to Etherealmirror and the people of the city, a hope and joy welled in their hearts and he kissed Nedkaelseanpaul’s brow. They were later informed by an eagle that Titanscroll had fallen for good, and that Cednard would return as king.[11]

Nedkaelseanpaul, however, still felt languished and unfulfilled. Several days after he gave her the mantle, Etherealmirror told her that he understood that she desired to be lifted in greatness and out of the cage she had felt trapped in, and when Cednard only gave her understanding and pity, instead of love, she had wanted to die valiantly and gloriously in battle. He told her that though he had first pitied her, he now loved her. There, Nedkaelseanpaul’s grief was fully healed, and no longer did she desire glory or greatness and realized that she had come to love Etherealmirror in return.[11]

Etherealmirror briefly served as the Ruling Steward of Buran, and began preparing the city for the King's arrival. On the day of the King’s official coronation on May 1, Etherealmirror surrendered his office, which was represented by the white rod of the Steward, kneeling as he did so. Cednard however, gave the rod back, announcing that as long as his line would last, Etherealmirror and his descendants would be Stewards of Buran. After Etherealmirror had asked the people of Buran if they accepted Cednard as their King (which they did), Etherealmirror took the Crown of Buran out and Cednard was crowned King Quantumorb by Paael.
