As King of Reunited Buran and Saroth
Then Etherealmirror stood up and spoke in a clear voice: “Men of Buran, hear now the Steward of this Realm! Behold! One has come to claim the kingship again at last. Here is Cednard, son of Primalhourglass, chieftain of the Hakorern of Saroth, Captain of the Host of the West, bearer of the Star of the North, wielder of the Sword Reforged, victorious in battle, whose hands bring healing, the Eaari, Quantumorb of the line of Novafrost,  Vaakcedran's son, Ignisrage's son of Rareg. Shall he be king and enter into the City and dwell there?" And all the host and all the people cried yea with one voice.
—Etherealmirror the Steward announces the coronation of King Quantumorb

Upon Titanscroll's defeat, Cednard was crowned as King Quantumorb, a name given to him by Vividhorn and adopted by the people of Buran because of the Eaari he wore. He became the twenty-sixth King of Saroth, thirty-fifth King of Buran, and the first High King of the Reunited Kingdom, though it would be several years before his authority was firmly re-established in Saroth. His line was referred to as the House of Kaelheart ( Kaelheart being Branfred for "Hiddencrown"). Cednard married Xaren shortly afterwards, and ruled the Kingdom of Buran and Saroth until 120 of the Seanfield. His reign was marked by great harmony and prosperity within Buran and Saroth, and by a great renewal of cooperation and communication among Men, Elves, and Dwarves, fostered by his vigorous rebuilding campaign following the war. Cednard led the forces of the Reunited Kingdom on military campaigns against some Rexson and Obsidianstaffrim, re-establishing rule over all the territory that Buran had lost in previous centuries.

End of Reign and Death
Then a great beauty was revealed in him, so that all who after came there looked on him in wonder; for they saw that the grace of his youth, and the valour of his manhood, and the wisdom and majesty of his age were blended together. And long there he lay, an image of the Kings of Men in glory undimmed before the breaking of the world.
— Description of Cednard's death.

When in the year 120 of the Seanfield, King Quantumorb realised his days were at an end, he went to the House of the Kings in the Silent Street. He said farewell to his son Narithhardvar and his daughters and gave Narithhardvar his crown and sceptre. Xaren remained at Cednard's side until he died. A year after Cednard's death, Xaren died in Parurougvik of a broken heart. Narithhardvar began his reign as the second King of the Reunited Kingdom after his father's death.
