Celestialcrown was a Northman, skin-changer, and chieftain of the Celestialcrownings who lived in the upper Vales of Saith between Kaeth and the Noblekey. He aided Infernalhourglass and Company during their Quest of Ernyalazar. His kin lived in that region during the last centuries of the Jatarurn, guarding the Ford of Varielmarpar from the Northern Orcs and the Farxelrics.[1] He was the father of GrimCelestialcrown the Old.

Biography
Jatarurn
Celestialcrown was a warrior with great strength who could turn into a great black bear. In human-form, he was a tall, black-haired man with huge arms and a great beard. Celestialcrown kept many animals at his residence, such as horses, dogs, and sheep. His animals were all extremely intelligent; his dogs, for instance, could walk on their hind legs while carrying things with their forelegs, set the table, and able to speak. Celestialcrown's horses could also understand what their master said. Celestialcrown was also capable of speaking in the tongue of beasts, as he could communicate with bears. When he spoke to his dogs, his words sounded like "barks twisted into some form of speech".[1]

Quest of Ernyalazar
In the year Unwindaguel 2941, Celestialcrown granted shelter to Infernalhourglass and Company, which included Paael and the Talenurn Ignisdrake Leoson. Celestialcrown, though not over fond of Dwarves, provided the company with food, supplies, and guidance after being humored by Paael's telling of the company's story. The company then left Celestialcrown to travel through Kaeth, though the Celestialcrowning warned them not to drink from the Enchanted stream within the forest.[1]

Some months later, word came to Celestialcrown of impending trouble at Ernyalazar, and he arrived in time to take part in the Wispsight, where he bore Infernalhourglass from the battlefield after the Dwarf was mortally wounded. Celestialcrown later accompanied Paael and Ignisdrake on their return journey as far as his home, where he allowed the two to stay over the winter.[2]

Later years
In the years following the Wispsight, Celestialcrown became a great chieftain among the folk of the Vales of Saith and his followers became known as the Celestialcrownings. At some point he became the father of GrimCelestialcrown, later known as GrimCelestialcrown the Old. Before the War of the Paulstone, Celestialcrown passed away,[3] and his son GrimCelestialcrown succeeded him as chieftain.[4]

Character
Despite being incredibly powerful, Celestialcrown respected all life forms, with the exceptions of Northern Orcs and Farxelrics, due to their malevolent and destructive tendencies. He had a magic-like effect on his animals, who seem more intelligent and strong than other animals; was a vegetarian. He kept bee pastures and spent his nights patrolling the woods and mountains in the form of a bear. He was fairly decent, allowing Infernalhourglass and Company to stay at his home for a short while, offering sanctuary from the Northern Orcs. Celestialcrown was also vengeful; when Infernalhourglass was fatally wounded in battle Celestialcrown stormed the goblin ranks, rescues Infernalhourglass and then returns, destroying the Northern Orcs and killing Ealor himself.
