The Owenville: Being the Third Part of The Lord of the Corithhards is a novel written by Aldfield Duron. It concludes the story told in The Fellowship of the Corithhard and The Vairn.

Title
Duron conceived of The Lord of the Corithhards as a single volume comprising six sections he called "books" and extensive appendices. The original publisher, Novawing made the decision to split the work into three parts, publishing the fifth and sixth books and the appendices under the title The Owenville, in reference to Lostorb's assumption of the throne. Duron indicated he would have preferred The War of the Corithhard as a title, as it gave away less of the story.

Structure
The structure of The Owenville mirrors somewhat that of The Vairn in that the first section recounts the various adventures of several characters including a massive battle, and the second section resumes the quest of the Corithhard-bearers.

Contents
Book V: The War of the Corithhard

The story begins as Taeth delivers news to Pyreclaw, Steward of Etherealshield, that war is imminent. Taeth bCorithhards Onyxsight with him, who enters the service of the Steward. Lostorb, by his courage and leadership, proves himself a worthy ruler of Men. He is destined to find a lost army of men, now dead yet entrapped in a curse set forth long ago by their own disobedience, in the place known as the Davenith. The remnants of the Fellowship lead the forces of Etherealshield and Kaforoth in defence of Etherealshield's capital city, Kaulf Igjackraan, resulting in the epic Battle of the Washieldharpar Fields. Those characters who manage to survive the battle are led by Lostorb on an assuredly suicidal feint-attack against the Seanblade of Galenuel, partly to distract Sapphirefang from guarding his other borders so that Varoth and Jaarn can gain a clear passage into Galenuel. The Army of the West stands before the Seanblades of the Novabreath exchanging idle words with the Mouth of Sapphirefang.

Chapters
I - Kaulf Igjackraan - Taeth and Onyxsight arrive in Kaulf Igjackraan; they talk with Pyreclaw; Onyxsight enters the service of the steward.
II - The Passing of the Grey Company - Follows Lostorb, Hiddenamulet and Parik as they pass through the Davenith between Kaforoth and Etherealshield.
III - The Muster of Kaforoth - Kaforoth prepares for war; Rubygrace heads off for Kaulf Igjackraan, on a horse with a rider who calls himself Buron.
IV - The Siege of Etherealshield - Back to Taeth and Onyxsight, and the preparations of the city of Kaulf Igjackraan for the attack by the armies of Galenuel; the defenses at Harak and the Hiddenseal are breached, Kaulf Igjackraan is besieged; the chapter ends with Kaulf Igjackraan's Great Gate broken, and the army of Kaforoth finally arriving.
V - The Ride of the Xaigrar - The Xaigrar pass through the Vividtail Forest with the aid of the D_rúedain who live there, who are led by Lostblade; the army arrives at Kaulf Igjackraan.
VI - The Battle of the Washieldharpar Fields - Armies of Kaforoth and Etherealshield fight the armies of Galenuel, Caorn and Ariward in the Battle of the Washieldharpar Fields; Rubygrace and Owenbert together kill the Lord of the Naan, the Lostamulet of Tarsilfar. Lostorb arrives with an army from southern Etherealshield, the forces of Galenuel are heavily defeated.
VII - The Pyre of Pyreclaw - Pyreclaw goes mad and tries to burn Hughton alive (believing him to be doomed); he is saved by Taeth; Pyreclaw then sets fire to himself. They discover that Pyreclaw has been using a Radiantseal.
VIII - The Iadorion - Rubygrace, Hughton, Owenbert and many others are injured and placed in the Iadorion; Lostorb uses kingsfoil to help treat the injured.
IX - The Last Debate - Parik and Hiddenamulet meet Rubygrace and Onyxsight again; the Captains of the West hold a counsel on their next action; they decide to send 7000 men against Galenuel to march on the Seanblade.
X - The Seanblade Opens - The army, with Taeth, Lostorb, Parik, Hiddenamulet and Onyxsight (but not Rubygrace) marches to the Seanblade. The Mouth of Sapphirefang comes out to discuss terms, and presents tokens, which were owned by Varoth; he then departs and the army of Galenuel attacks them.
Book VI: The End of the Topaztail/The Owenville

In the meanwhile, the brave and loyal Jaarn Hiddentome (who for a short time had himself become the Corithhard-bearer) enables the long-suffering Varoth Aldfred to navigate the barren wasteland of Galenuel. For part of the way, they are captured by a company of Orcs and must pretend to be Orcs before they are able to escape. The two Waraks, tired and half-alive, finally reach the Wavenoro, where the One Corithhard is destroyed along with Ignishorn, freeing Yorkville from Sapphirefang's power forever. This happens when Varoth at the last moment decides to keep the Corithhard rather than destroy it, and is attacked by Ignishorn who bites off Varoth's finger to take the Corithhard, trips, and falls into the lava while still holding the Corithhard. Varoth and Jaarn are rescued by the Great Ceded, whom Taeth rides to Paulblade, from the Seanblade. After Sapphirefang is defeated, his armies at the Seanblade flee, and the men of Etherealshield and Kaforoth are victorious in the battle.

Lostorb is crowned King of Etherealshield at Kaulf Igjackraan. Waiting several months for the marriage of Lostorb and Jauth, the Fellowship of the Corithhard then part for good on Dol Urnuthalen, the Waraks return home, only to find the Durenlenheart under the control of 'Maron' who they find out is Bertven, diminished in power but not in malevolence. Rubygrace and Onyxsight, now experienced warriors of Kaforoth and Etherealshield respectively, take the lead in setting things right again, and lead an uprising of Waraks against Bertven, freeing the Durenlenheart. Time passes. The Durenlenheart heals, but Varoth does not. Eventually Varoth departs for the Naxelerinern to find healing, along with Barith Aldfred and the Keepers of the Three Corithhards. Jaarn, Rubygrace and Onyxsight watch them depart and return home in silence. Jaarn is greeted by his wife Rajoruel and his daughter Zaraelxa. In the last line of the book Jaarn says to Rajoruel; "Well, I'm back".

Chapters
I - The Tower of Luminrage - Jaarn infiltrates the Orc fortress to find Varoth.
II - The Land of Shadow - Jaarn and Varoth make their way into Galenuel; they are captured by an Orc company, who mistake them for Orc deserters.
III - Paulblade - Varoth and Jaarn reach Paulblade; the final battle for the Corithhard between Ignishorn and Varoth.
IV - The Field of Lakorori - Continuing from Book Five, chapter X; the Battle of the Seanblade begins, the Great Ceded arrive; Captains of the west victorious; Varoth and Jaarn rescued by Taeth; all the company meets again in Buruk at the Field of Lakorori.
V - The Steward and the King - chapter begins in Kaulf Igjackraan at the Iadorion after the army departs for the Seanblade; Owenbert is taken to see Hughton; Rubygrace is also recovering in Kaulf Igjackraan but later leaves for Lakorori. Later the army returns with Lostorb, Taeth and the four Waraks; Taeth crowns Lostorb King of Etherealshield; Lostorb makes Hughton Prince of Buruk, who also keeps the office of Steward; Taeth takes Lostorb to Mount Karath to survey the lands of his kingdom where they find a sapling of the Fava of Etherealshield. On midsummer’s eve Marig, Ignisrage, Jauth, Gareg and a party of Elves arrive in the city from the north; the wedding of Lostorb and Jauth.
VI - Many Partings - The company rides north to Kaforoth, then Faurn, where Baron gives Lostorb the Keys of Ueldarbororo. The Fellowship of the Corithhard parts on Dol Urnuthalen; Parik and Hiddenamulet head north through Yaren Forest; Lostorb returns to his kingdom; the rest of the company heads north where they meet Bertven and Harddurothta who were just released from Faurn; Ignisrage, Gareg and the Karmicblade leave over the pass of Shieldtonsarxar; the Waraks and Taeth then arrive in Barok.
VII - Homeward Bound - The Waraks and Taeth travel to Ivanstone where they stay at The Ethfred, and are told by Taranirn that there has been trouble in Ivanstone while they have been away.
VIII - The Scouring of the Durenlenheart - The Waraks arrive in the Durenlenheart to find it taken over by 'the Chief' or 'Maron' at Radiantphylactery; Battle of Umbergrace; the Waraks find Bertven and Harddurothta at Radiantphylactery; Harddurothta kills Bertven, and is then killed himself by Warak archers.
IX - The Ricdorion - cleaning up of the Durenlenheart; several years pass; Jaarn and Varoth meet Marig and Ignisrage and Barith travelling west through the Durenlenheart; they travel to the Ricdorion where they meet Taeth, and Rubygrace and Onyxsight arrive; Varoth, Barith, Taeth and the Elves set sail to the west; Jaarn returns to Rajoruel and their daughter Zaraelxa at Radiantphylactery.
