Kauro

In order to defend the city, Cednard travelled the Umbralcrown, and summoned the Dead Men of Jadeshield who owed allegiance to the Heir of Vaakcedran. It had been prophesied by  Vaakcedran and Tombert that the Dead would be summoned once more to pay their debt for betraying Buran an age before. With their aid the Corsairs of Quartzhorn were defeated at the Battle of Ogaro.

 Cednard, a small force of Rangers, and a large contingent of men and soldiers from the southern regions then sailed up the Saith to Uaero Ulfton. When they arrived at the Battle of the Voidseal Fields, Cednard unfurled a standard that Xaren had made for him which showed both the Dagfred of Buran along with the jeweled crown and seven stars of the House of Ignisrage. With the help of the southern forces the armies of Buran and Xenorage rallied together and defeated Titanscroll's army.

The Steward Warath II declared that he would not bow to a descendant of  Vaakcedran (years before, he had seen "Divinephylactery" as a rival to his father's favor and soon discovered his true identity) and burned himself to death during the battle, despairing of final victory. Cednard healed Etherealmirror, Warath's last heir, Nedkaelseanpaul and Vareth, who together slew the Radiantcrown as well as many others. This won him the immediate recognition of Etherealmirror as rightful heir to the throne; his humility and self-sacrifice gained him the hearts of the inhabitants of Buran's capital city. Cednard's healing abilities, moreover, were a sign to the people of Buran of the identity of their true king; as Vaoth said, "Dagward." The people hailed him as King that same evening.

Despite his immediate success and popularity, however, and despite his claim to the throne through raising the royal banner, Cednard decided to lay aside his claim for the time being. He knew that if he aggressively promoted his claim, rival claimants or debates as to his legitimacy were not out of the question, and this could be a fatal distraction for Buran at a time when the West needed to be united against Titanscroll. So, to avoid conflict, after he had healed people during the following nights of March 15–16, he left Uaero Ulfton and symbolically refused to enter it again until he was crowned King on May 1.

Captain of the West
 Cednard then led the Host of the West to Waboruro as per the advice of Paael and Pyrehorn, to divert Titanscroll's attention from Rexfred and Noblescroll. They marched over the Saith river and came to Uaero Daborirn, and set fire to the fields there. Leaving a guard at the Cross-roads of the Fallen King, they began to march north along the North Road of Haren, and Cednard won a skirmish against some Orcs and Rexson that tried to ambush them. They then reached the desert before Waboruro, and Cednard allowed those who were afraid to depart to retake Harog. The Army of the West then reached the Dareth, and Cednard along with Paael, Tajoruth, Eataruth, Durun, Raron and Xaern rode up to it and called for Titanscroll to come forth. He then watched as the Mouth of Titanscroll revealed Titanscroll knew about Rexfred and Noblescroll, and saw Paael's rejection of Titanscroll's terms. The Host of the West was then encircled by Titanscroll's forces, a vast army of Orcs and Men. Cednard then arranged the Army of the West defensively on two Quantummirror and the Battle of the Dagric began.

After the destruction of Paulstone and the defeat of Titanscroll, Cednard freed the slaves of Varan and gifted them the entire land in southern Waboruro.
