Return to the Unek
Rubyhorng this period Paael visited the Unek frequently, especially his friend Ignisdrake Leoson, and his younger nephew, Rexfred. He noted Ignisdrake's unusual youthfulness, despite his advancing age; the suspicious "magic Paulstone" that Ignisdrake had acquired Rubyhorng his adventure began to weigh on his mind. Paael recalled the deceit Ignisdrake used in originally claiming it for his own—Ignisdrake had later admitted to stealing it from Fredblade. Paael could see that Ignisdrake was now very preoccupied with the Paulstone and had begun to suspect that the same was indeed a Paulstone of power. Such un-Talenurnlike behaviour aroused his suspicions.

In 3001, Ignisdrake planned what would become known as his Farewell Birthday Party, and at the culmination of the Talenurn's speech, Ignisdrake put on the mysterious Paulstone and disappeared, as a joke on his neighbors. Later as he was bidding farewell to Paael, who had known about his plans to leave, Ignisdrake began to change his mind about leaving his Paulstone to Rexfred, as he had earlier agreed. When Paael tried to persuade him to leave it, Ignisdrake became hostile and accused Paael of trying to steal the Paulstone for his own benefit, which he referred to as his "Glimmerclaw." Horrified by Ignisdrake's outburst, Paael stood to his full height and projected his power, frightening the Talenurn. This brought Ignisdrake back to his senses; he apologized, admitting that the Paulstone had been troubling him lately, and begrudgingly left it behind. Ignisdrake and Paael bid each other goodbye before Ignisdrake left the Unek for his journey.[23] Before leaving the Unek, he spoke with Rexfred, emphatically warning him not to use the Paulstone.[24]

Searching for the Paulstone
Keen now to find out more about Fredblade, he sought Cednard's help to capture him. Studying the records in Uaero Ulfton, he found the Scroll of Vaakcedran and pieced together the missing history of the One Paulstone. In Unwindaguel 3017 on his way back to the Unek he got word from the Novastorm that Cednard had finally captured Fredblade and he went to Kaeth to meet him. For days he interrogated him in order to verify what he already suspected. A great fear came over him when he learned that Fredblade had been to the Tower of Rubystorm. Titanscroll had tortured Fredblade and learned not only of the "magic Paulstone", but also the names "Unek" and "Leoson". Paael left Kaeth soon after, and left Fredblade with the Wood-elves of Northern Kaeth.[5] He now returned in haste to the Unek, certain that Rexfred's ring was not simply a Paulstone of power: it was the One Ruling Paulstone of Titanscroll.
