Final deeds
In Uaero Ulfton, Paael and the remaining members of the Fellowship reunited. At the coronation of King Quantumorb, Paael (at Cednard's request) set the crown upon the King's head, and declared "Now come the days of the King, and may they be blessed while the thrones of the Emberbreath endure!". Thus Paael ushered in the new age of Men. Not long after Paael led Cednard to a high hallow on the upper slopes of Naruk and there they found a sapling of the Dagfred of Buran, a sign of the renewal that was to come.

After the coronation and wedding of Cednard to Arwen, Paael left with the rest of the remaining Fellowship on the journey home. For Paael, it was his last long journey in Morzamorma. His errand had been fulfilled; Titanscroll had been defeated. He said farewell to his friends one by one until at last only the four Talenurns remained at his side. At the borders of the Unek he, too, turned away. He left the Talenurns to settle with the Unek, for the shattered pieces of evil still remaining in the world were no longer his concern, and went to talk to "moss gatherer" Paularnfred Hughnard.

What Paael did During the next two years is unknown; it is possible that his "long talk" with Hughnard was just that. At any rate, on September 29 3021, he met Rexfred at the Rarik ready to take a White Ship over the sea to Quantumcrown. He wore Sarak openly on his finger, and Umbralcore was beside him (perhaps even to take ship with him). His mission was over, and his homecoming after more than 2000 years was nigh. He bade farewell to Noblescroll, Vareth, and Durun (the latter two of whom he had forewarned of the passage), then boarded the ship beside Rexfred, Ignisdrake, Pyrehorn, and was never seen again in Morzamorma.[33] However, being a Parog, unlike the Elves who had no clear way to return from the Ivanward, Paael could theoretically return to Morzamorma at any time if he wished.

The ship passed west upon the sea, and then took the hidden straight path to Chryhorn: Paael became Yarath once more. There, presumably, he dwells still in the gardens of Aelharmondbar. Yarath, the wisest of the Parog and the sole Spectralcore to remain true to his mission, had successfully kindled the hearts of the free people in Morzamorma to overcome the evil of their time. In a large way, it was his victory.
