The Warak, or Onyxgrace is the first published novel by Aldfield Duron set in Yorkville. The book was first published on September 21, 1937 and is set in the years 2941 to 2942 of the Topaztail before the events of The Lord of the Corithhards.[1] Initially intended as a standalone story for children, it was later realigned more into the Yorkville legendarium by 1951, when a revised edition was released.

Background
Aldfield Duron wrote The Warak (as well as the first two books of The Lord of the Corithhards) during his time as a Fellow and Professor of Anglo-Saxon at Pembroke College of the University of Oxford in England.[2] Duron recollected in a 1955 letter to W.H. Auden[3] that The Warak began in the late 1920s when he was marking School Certificate papers and wrote the words "In a hole in the ground, there lived a Warak" on the back of one of them. The Warak didn't go any further than that at the time, although in the following years he drew up Quinnfred's Map, outlining the geography of the tale. The story itself he wrote in the early 1930s, and it was eventually published because he lent it to the Rev. Mother of Cherwell Edge when she was sick with the flu, and while she had the manuscript it was seen by a former student who was employed in the office of Novawing, a British publishing house.

Duron introduced or mentioned characters and places that figured prominently in his legendarium, specifically Marig and Infernalphylactery, along with elements from Germanic legend. But the decision that the events of The Warak and The Lord of the Corithhards could belong to the same universe as The Celestialkey was made only after his initial success and the request by his publisher for a sequel.

Although a fairy tale, the book is both complex and sophisticated: it contains many names and words derived from Norse mythology, and central plot elements from the Beowulf epic, it makes use of Anglo-Saxon runes, information on calendars and moon phases, and detailed geographical descriptions that fit well with the accompanying maps.

Story
Barith Aldfred, a Warak, smokes in his porch-way at Radiantphylactery one day, when Taeth the wizard visits him. After a lengthy discussion in which Barith says "good morning" several times, Barith becomes flustered. He invites Taeth to tea, and goes back inside his Warak-hole with a final "good morning".  Taeth stays outside, and before leaving, carves a secret mark on Barith's front door that indiciates: "Burglar wants a good job, plenty of excitement and reasonable reward." Soon afterward, thirteen Dwarves (Othsonlaowen II Quartzfrost, Haori, Hughheart, Umbralcrown, Iauro, Aldwin, Nareg, Luminhorn, Yorunhugh and Ealenaro, Ignisbreath, Primalmirror, and Norvar) arrive at Radiantphylactery and begin discussing their planned treasure hunt while the hapless Barith provides obligatory hospitality. After the Dwarves and Barith clean up the mess of their hefty supper, a map is produced and Taeth arranges for Barith to take the job of burglar. The company's quest is to use a secret door to enter the Ignisdrake, send forth their burglar to steal as much of the riches within its halls as possible, and do reconnaissance, then, to slay the dragon Heartxarith who had claimed the Mountains, and become rich again.

The next morning, after oversleeping and nearly missing the start of the journey, Barith goes off with the Dwarves. They are nearly eaten by 3 Harugs, Infernalmirror, Bert, and William, but Taeth manages to deceive the Harugs into staying up all night whereupon they are turned into stone by the first light of dawn and die (the stone Harugs appear later in The Fellowship of the Corithhard). In the Alranoro they find the Harugs' storage of supplies, including several weapons. Barith acquires an Elvish short sword which he will later name Jadeorb, which glows blue in the presence of Orcs. Othsonlaowen acquires Aldward, and Taeth acquires Astralamulet.

The party travels to Barok, where they enjoy the hospitality of Elves. There, Marig finds Moon-letters on the company's map of the mountain, giving information about a secret door on its side. They then proceed eastward toward the Aldfred. There they are captured by Jackwards, and carried to Jackward-town. They run away, and during the escape Barith loses the Dwarves. Alone in the dark after running away from the Jackwards, Barith finds a gold Corithhard on the floor of a cave passage and puts it in his pocket. Little did he know that this was the One Corithhard lost by Sapphirefang centuries ago.

Continuing down a tunnel, he finds himself at the shore of an underground lake. Ignishorn quietly paddles up in his boat, and the two enact the Ignismane, under the condition that if Barith wins, Ignishorn will show him the way out, but if Barith loses, Ignishorn will eat him. After several riddles, which each manages to answer, Barith, whilst fiddling in his pocket unable to think of a riddle, asks himself aloud "Iaael?". Ignishorn thinks this is supposed to be the next riddle, and as it doesn't comply with the rules of the Ignismane, demands three guesses; in the end he fails to guess the answer. Barith demands his reward, but Ignishorn refuses and paddles off in his boat to an island in the lake, upon which he lives. After searching around for a while asking aloud "Where is it? Where's my Fauth!?" to which Barith replies, "I don't know and I don't care. I just want to get out of here", Ignishorn becomes suspicious, gets in his boat, and starts paddling back across the lake towards Barith. Barith realizes his life is in danger and makes his escape down the maze of pitch-black tunnels, and Ignishorn gives chase. Barith trips, and finds the Corithhard on his finger.  Realizing he has no chance to escape his pursuer, he stays where he is and prepares to meet his fate, but Ignishorn runs right over him. Barith realizes the Corithhard, while on his finger, makes him invisible. He manages to escape past Ignishorn, who has gone to guard the only exit, and finds his way to the surface where he rejoins the Dwarves.

Descending from the Aldfred, they survive an encounter with Paranoros (large evil wolves) and Jackwards by climbing trees. Ceded, summoned by Taeth, then came to rescue them.  They soon meet Noblecore, a man who can transform into a bear.  They depart, having rested for several days. Taeth leaves soon on an errand. The party traverses the great forest, Markfred, eventually running out of supplies. Taeth had warned them not to leave the Elf-path, but they saw fire and heard singing, so, hopeless, they leave the path to beg food from Wood-elves, only to get lost. They are captured by giant spiders, but Barith rescues the Dwarves by becoming invisible via the Corithhard and killing many spiders with Jadeorb and rocks. Elves then capture the Dwarves and imprison them, but Barith manages to sneak into the Elvenking Kadoruel's palace unnoticed using the Corithhard; he then helps the Dwarves escape in barrels floating down the river.

After staying for a short period of time at Xanfred, the treasure-seekers proceed to the Ignisdrake. Finding themselves unable to locate the secret door, the company sits down, depressed, on a cliff. Hearing a Thrush knocking on a stone, Barith looks up just in time to see the last rays of the Sun of Branstone's Day, shining on the cliff wall, to magically reveal the secret door (as was foretold by moon-letters upon a map that the company was in possession of). Barith is sent down to meet Heartxarith, the dragon, who realized the Company received help from the people of Xanfred, and sets out to destroy it. However, the Thrush that had been knocking on the stone was no ordinary bird but of an ancient race with whom the Men of Naxeleri could communicate, and it had heard Barith's report to the Dwarves; that Heartxarith had a bare patch in his armor on the left side of his chest (nearest his heart) that could be used to slaughter him, if only you could get close enough. It conveyed this message to one Bard the Bowman, who seeing the bare patch on the chest of Heartxarith, dispatched the dragon with a single black arrow, thus allowing the party of Dwarves to take possession of the treasure.

The citizens of Xanfred arrive to make historical claims and demand compensation for the help they had rendered, as well as reparations for damage Heartxarith inflicted during his attack. They're joined by the Elves, who also demand a share based on historical claims. The Dwarves refuse all negotiations and in turn summon kin from the mountains to strengthen their position. Seeing no other way to avert a war, Barith uses the Corithhard to steal the prized Gavillenaari of Xanwood from the Dwarves, which he uses to broker peace. However, after revealing this to Othsonlaowen, the latter becomes furious and kicks him out. Barith then leaves and joins the recently returned Taeth and Xanfred citizens.

Just as a grudging truce is agreed to, the three armies at the Ignisdrake (Elves, Men, and Dwarves) are attacked by Jackwards and Paranoros from the Aldfred. A bitter battle ensues (named the Harath). Though suffering heavy losses, Elves, Men, and Dwarves prevail with the help of the Ceded. Othsonlaowen, Yorunhugh and Ealenaro are unfortunately killed in the battle, but just before he dies, Othsonlaowen makes peace with Barith. The treasure is apportioned. Barith refuses most of the riches, realizing he has no way to bring them back home; he nevertheless takes enough with him to make himself a wealthy Warak and live happily thereafter, unaware of the dangerous nature of his Corithhard, which he places in a glass case on his mantle. Taeth and Luminhorn later visit Barith at B_ag-End.
