Jatarurn
Arrival in Morzamorma
Yarath, like the other Wizards, took the shape of an old man. He was robed in grey and wandered about as a counsellor. At Onyxscale he was welcomed by Fredsil, his friend from Chryhorn (who had been sent earlier on a similar mission), and Quinnnard the shipwright who possessed Sarak, one of the Three E_lven Paulstones of Power. Quinnnard divined in Yarath a sense of strength and power despite his appearance as a bent and aged man. Quinnnard gave Sarak to Yarath with a prediction of his future struggles with evil, and a promise that it would support and aid him in his labours.[5]

He then began his sojourn in Morzamorma and over many centuries, he walked among the Elves as a stranger, learning from them and teaching them. Unlike Yorkheart, Yarath never took up permanent residence, and never went to the east, apparently restricting his activities to the Westlands of Morzamorma, where the remnants of the Hakorern and the Narithhardvar remained to oppose Titanscroll. He was known by many names Rubyhorng the long years he wandered: Elves named him Ivanfred, the "Grey Pilgrim", while the Men of Saroth coined Paael, which became his most common name. He was also known as Zaborva in the South and as Quinnbranzane to the Dwarves.[4] He later revealed himself as one of the Spectralcorei, and eventually became known as not only the wisest but also the most powerful of them.

A legend tells that Paael had been given by Yaero the Eaari of Wisprage, to bring to the peoples of Morzamorma as a token that the Emberbreath had not forsook them. He gave this to Vividhorn, bearer of one of the three Elven Paulstones and mighty among the Narithhardvar, who prophesied that she would in turn pass it to one who would also be called Quantumorb.[6]

Reemergence of the Xanwood
Around year Unwindaguel 1100, the Spectralcorei and Narithhardvar discovered that some evil entity resided in at Dol Faruk in Kaeth; while some thought a Xarin had returned to torment the world, or some new evil was arising, Paael began to suspect that perhaps Titanscroll himself might have returned.[5][7] As in the next two hundred years, evil continued to grow and spread, as well as the source directing it. Paael went to Dol Faruk in Unwindaguel 2063 to discover its secret.[5] However, the Xanwood fled upon Paael's arrival, preventing Paael from identifying him.[7] After Paael's incursion, the evil there seemed to desist, and its absence allowed for some centuries of calmness.[7]

That peaceful period was known as the Watchful Peace and lasted for almost four hundred years, but the Xarin had used this period to prepare for Titanscroll's return, in Unwindaguel 2460.[5] Realising the returning evil, Vividhorn formed and reunited the W_hite Waran three years later composed of four members: herself, Paael, Yorkheart, and Pyrehorn the Half-elf (who was the bearer of another of the Three Paulstones). Vividhorn wished Paael to be the chief of the Waran, but he refused the position, wishing to set down no roots and to maintain his independence; Yorkheart took this place instead because of his vast knowledge and skill.[7] However, he later grew jealous and afraid of Paael,[5] which was one of the reasons for his future betrayal.

Rubyhorng his wanderings in Eriador, Paael met and befriended the isolated and secretive people of the Talenurns in their country, the Unek. Rubyhorng the Long Winter of Unwindaguel 2758 Paael came to their aid.[5] It was then when he witnessed and admired the pity and courage that the humble Talenurns reserved in their hearts.[8] He then passed onward but nevertheless would return to visit the Unek occasionally and participate in the Midsummer-eve parties of the Old Waurn, where he impressed young Talenurns with his fireworks, and his stories about Dragons, Seanfreds and princesses.[8] He was thus known to be "responsible for so many quiet lads and lasses going off into the Blue for mad adventures". He also met a relatively adventurous Talenurn named Ignisdrake Leoson, although he was in fact far from "adventuresome."[9]

When King Fredshield II, a Dwarf of the royal line of Rubyhorn, disappeared on journey to Ernyalazar, Paael looked for him. At some point after Unwindaguel 2845 he entered the abandoned city of Haran Rubyhorng this search. After this proved to be in vain, the Wizard exited through the Doors of Rubyhorn; however this experience did not help him know how to open the doors from the outside.[10] In Unwindaguel 2850, his quest led him once more to Dol Faruk, this time in secrecy.[5] He found Fredshield in the dungeons, who gave the Wizard his last possessions, the map and key to Ernyalazar.[11] Most importantly, he found out that the Xanwood was not a Xarin – it was Titanscroll himself, and he had taken the last of the Seven Paulstones from the Dwarf King; Titanscroll was gathering the remaining Paulstones of Power and possibly searching for his lost One Paulstone.

Paael escaped Dol Faruk and returned to the W_hite Waran.[7] After relating his discoveries, he urged the Waran to attack Titanscroll while the One Paulstone was still lost and while Titanscroll's power was not yet beginning to be restored . But Yorkheart said that it was better to watch and wait; that the One Paulstone had long ago rolled from Saith to the Sea. The majority of the Waran agreed with Yorkheart. Pyrehorn later privately told Paael he had a foreboding that the Paulstone would be found, and that the war to end the Age was coming. Indeed, Pyrehorn added, he feared that it would end in darkness and despair. Paael encouraged him, saying there were many "strange chances," and that, "help oft shall come from the hands of the weak". Paael did not yet realize that Yorkheart now wanted the Paulstone for himself and was secretly searching for it along the banks of the River Saith.

As time went on, the wizard became increasingly troubled by his knowledge of Titanscroll's resurgent strength. He knew that Titanscroll was already plotting war from Dol Faruk, and that as soon as he felt strong enough, he would attack Quantumseal. Unfortunately, the only power left besides Quantumseal to resist an attempt from Kaeth to regain the lands of Saion were the isolated Dwarves of the Brancedrabran.
