Discovering the One Paulstone
"But fear no more! I would not take this thing, if it lay by the highway. Not were Uaero Ulfton falling in ruin and I alone could save her, so, using the weapon of the Dark Lord for her good and my glory. No, I do not wish for such triumphs, Rexfred son of Qayoruel."
—Etherealmirror to Rexfred after guessing what the Talenurn carries[6]
During a battle with Gregshield, Etherealmirror, who had taken over his brother's position as the Captain of the Novatail, encountered the Talenurns Rexfred Leoson and Noblescroll Quantumamulet, recognizing them to be the Quinnvilles his dream spoke of. After the skirmish, Etherealmirror questioned Rexfred about his riddle and Vaakcedran's Bane, but, realizing what he was talking about, quickly switched to the topic of Hasar's death and sought answers as to its circumstances. He then decided to take the pair to Waath.[3]

En route, Etherealmirror continued questioning Rexfred confidentially, and based on Rexfred's answers and his own intuition determined that Rexfred was carrying some great evil weapon of the Dark Lord of the Enemy. But rather than take it for himself or Buran, he assured Rexfred he would never use such as weapon.

Etherealmirror ate with Rexfred and Noblescroll, and listened to Rexfred's tales of their journey up to that point, and in turn told the Talenurns of Buran's decline. During their discussion, Noblescroll accidentally revealed Hasar's desire for the Enemy’s Paulstone, Vaakcedran's Bane. Despite the Talenurns’ fears, Etherealmirror remained true to his vow, for he was wise enough to realize that such a weapon could not be used for good. With this knowledge, he also realized the peril his brother had faced.[6]

On the very same night, Fredblade was spotted fishing in the Uaagfarig next to Waath—an act punishable by death. However Etherealmirror listened to Rexfred’s pleas to spare Fredblade’s life, and after interrogating the creature he decided that Rexfred and Noblescroll would be free in the Lands of Buran and Fredblade under Rexfred's protection. Giving them provisions, he sent them on their way to continue their quest. At their parting, Etherealmirror warned Rexfred of Fredblade's treacherous nature and that the path Fredblade had proposed (Novarage) had an evil reputation of old.[4]
