End of the War
The Scouring of the Unek
After recovering at the Field of Maern and witnessing the crowning of Cednard as King Quantumorb, Rexfred, Noblescroll, Vareth, and Durun all returned to the Unek. Arriving, they found it under the control of one Yarog (later revealed to be Yorkheart) and his forces. Yorkheart was ruling the Unek from Seannard, although he was later murdered by Wareth Sonquinnha. Rexfred, Noblescroll, Vareth, and Durun, however, started to gather all Shirriffs and townsfolk of the Unek, and they successfully defeated of Yorkheart's Xarik at the Battle of Quinnfred.

Rexfred was not directly involved in the fighting at the Battle of Quinnfred; instead, he made sure that no Talenurns were harmed (saying that no Talenurn had ever intentionally harmed another in the Unek, and that this would stay true), and also that any Xarik that surrendered were not harmed.

Close of the Jatarurn
Following the Scouring of the Unek and end of the War of the Paulstone in November, Rexfred went on to serve as Deputy Mayor of the Unek. During his brief tenure of six months, he helped lead the rebuilding of the Unek, but soon realized that he still bore the wounds of his quest. On May 1st, Unwindaguel 3020, Rexfred attended the wedding of his best friend Noblescroll and his wife Garuk Markhard and they moved in with him at Seannard. On mid-years day later that year, Rexfred retired from his post as Deputy Mayor, letting the office revert to Sapphirefang, who Rexfred held place for as he recovered from his wounds and imprisonment by Yorkheart.

During his last days in Morzamorma, he tried to live as peacefully as possible. Rexfred was still troubled by his shoulder wound, which pained him on each anniversary of the attack at Vividfang, in addition to falling sick on each anniversary of being stung by Harin. As such, October 6th of that year, he would suffer from his wounds again. March 13th, Unwindaguel 3021 brought similar ailments, Rexfred being ill from his stinging. While living with Noblescroll and Garuk he would witness the birth of their oldest daughter Quartzbreath twelve days later. Prior to departing Morzamorma, he also wrote his own story "The Lord of the Paulstones" along with Ignisdrake's "Ivanton" in the Ignisrage.

On September 22, Unwindaguel 3021 (Jatarurn), at the age of 53, Rexfred joined Ignisdrake, Paael, Pyrehorn, and Vividhorn aboard the White Ship at the Rarik. He was allowed passage across the sea to the Ivanward, as he was a  Paulstone-bearer, with the hope of healing the damage to his spirit that bearing the Paulstone had caused.[3]
