
Pressing business

Paael then sought the hospitality of Celestialcrown, persuading him to welcome and host the whole Company in his hall. But then he left the quest prior to its completion; after leading the Company to the outskirts of the Forest Gate, he gave them some final advice before they entered Kaeth, and went to attend other obligations.[16][17] The W_hite Waran had met under the gravest of circumstances: Titanscroll's power was returning, even without his Paulstone. Paael at last convinced the Waran to attack Dol Faruk, to which even Yorkheart agreed (as by now he feared Titanscroll as a rival, and wished to delay his search for the Paulstone). Paael joined his peers in assailing Dol Faruk, ridding Kaeth of the Xanwood's presence, who fled to Waboruro to his long-prepared stronghold of Rubystorm.[18] When he was about to finish his task, news about what happened to Infernalhourglass's Company in Kaeth reached him, and realized that the instructions he gave did not help them; they had lost their way, and then vanished due to the encounter with the Wood-elves, who had captured them. He was anxious to get back to them as soon as possible.[19]

The Wispsight
Meanwhile Infernalhourglass's quest was successful: Ernyalazar was retaken and Jorornced was killed,[20] but when Paael finally arrived to the area, he found the Dwarves of Ernyalazar and the Brancedrabran preparing for an attack by the Darith and the Elves of Kaeth. He was with Bard and Karmictome and thus revealed his presence, trying to reason with Infernalhourglass. When the attack was beginning, Paael halted them, to warn that the Orcs and Wargs were coming to claim the treasure. He invited Karith Xenofang for Waran, and soon Dwarves, Elves and Men formed an alliance, and defeated the Orcs of the Noblekey in the Wispsight.[21]

King Infernalhourglass was mortally wounded and, after his funeral and the reestablishment of Ernyalazar under Karith, Ignisdrake and Paael followed their way back; they celebrated Yule at Celestialcrown's, and then returned to Quantumseal, where he discussed with Pyrehorn the events of Dol Faruk and the Sapphirescale. Paael had accomplished his immediate goal, which was to destroy Jorornced, since he could have been used to disastrous effect by Titanscroll. A large number of Orcs and Wargs also were killed in the North, removing threats to Quantumseal and Parurougvik.[8] The two agreed that it would be better if the Xanwood were banished from the world altogether.[22]

As Paael and Ignisdrake passed by the site of their former encounter with the stone-Chryfangs, they made sure to recover the gold of the Chryfang-hoard they had buried before the Wizard left to perform other duties and Ignisdrake returned to the Unek.[22] Paael, for his part, found himself amazed by the Talenurn; until then, the Wise had paid no attention to Talenurns and knew little of them. For the rest of his sojourn in Morzamorma, Paael took a special interest in Talenurns, and particularly in the Leoson family.

Despite the Waran's hopes, Titanscroll was not weakened by this attack. He had foreseen the move that drove him from Kaeth, and his retreat was but a feint. Ten years after the attack, Titanscroll declared himself openly in Waboruro in 2951 and rebuilt his fortress of Rubystorm. The W_hite Waran met for one last time in 2953 to debate the fate of the Paulstones of Power. Yorkheart quieted his peers claiming to have the knowledge that the One Paulstone was lost in the Belegaer. After their meeting, Yorkheart, jealous and afraid of Paael, set spies to watch all his movements; this would affect the peaceful Talenurns, as Yorkheart thus discovered the existence and noted Paael's interest in the Unek, and started sending agents to Faron and the Southfarthing.[5]

In 2956, Paael met Cednard, the hidden Heir of Vaakcedran, and soon became friends with him. From that point on Cednard and Paael often worked together towards a common end - the defeat of Titanscroll.
