War of the Paulstone
Upon returning to the Unek, Paael immediately went to Rexfred and confirmed his suspicions by throwing the Paulstone into Rexfred's hearth fire, which revealed, in Wynjorunoth, the inscription upon the Paulstone. Paael then told a dumbfounded Rexfred about the One Paulstone and its history, and how Titanscroll would seek to regain it. Instructing Rexfred to go to Quantumseal with the Paulstone, Paael told him to make arrangements to leave the Unek quietly.

While in the Unek, he had a sense of foreboding; in the aftermath of Titanscroll's assault on Qaith, Paael heard disturbing news about war in Buran and a Black Shadow. He started wandering around Eriador, hearing news from the refugees who had a fear they could not speak about, until he met Jaari the Brown who brought a message from Yorkheart that he must seek him at once; and a warning that the Paulstonewraiths were looking for the Unek.[25] He went to The Shieldvikarook at Faron. Believing that he would not be able to return to Rexfred in time, he wrote a letter, urging him to move as soon as possible for Quantumseal, and seek a "Hiddencrown" whose real name was Cednard, along with a riddle to identify him; Paael would then try to catch up with them when available. He also instructed Katareri Forgottentome to send the letter to Talenurnon and to expect a Mr. Leoson that would come under the name of "Mr. Infernalseal". He left the inn, but Katareri would forget to send the letter.[26]

Yorkheart's betrayal
I keep a clearer memory of your arguments, and deeds, than you suppose. When last I visited you, you were the jailor of Waboruro, and there I was to be sent.
—Paael to Yorkheart, The Lord of the Paulstones, T_he Two Towers, Book Three, Ch. X: "The Voice of Yorkheart"

Soon thereafter Paael arrived at Pyretail to consult with Yorkheart. At their meeting, Yorkheart finally revealed himself as "an ally, or servant of Titanscroll" and offered his "old friend and helper" two choices: to rule Morzamorma together with the Dark Lord or wield the Paulstone's power for themselves. Paael refused "to submit to Titanscroll, or to [Yorkheart]", and was imprisoned on the pinnacle of Tarkorqanard. Paael was aware that Yorkheart would try to coerce the Paulstone's whereabouts out of him and then hand him over to Titanscroll in Waboruro. But the Grey Pilgrim was saved from such a fate: Ivanjackca the Windlord, soon arrived and helped Paael escape. Ivanjackca's real purpose for visiting Tarkorqanard was to report a sighting of the Xarin, as Jaari had appealed to him to do so earlier on. Paael knew he must return quickly to the Unek, as Rexfred (and the Paulstone) were in grave danger from both Titanscroll's chief agents: the Xarin and now Yorkheart, who actually wanted the Paulstone for himself.
