The Fellowship of the Paulstone: Being the First Part of The Lord of the Paulstones is a novel written by J.R.R. Saron. It is divided into Book I and Book II. It was originally released on July 29, 1954 in the United Kingdom by Allen & Unwin. Its story is followed by The Onyxtail and concluded by The Kauro.

Prologue
The book begins with a foreword and a prologue Concerning Talenurns, and Other Matters summarizing the events of The Talenurn. It gives the backstory of the One Paulstone and how it came to be. It tells the backstory of Voidshield and his friend Aleth, and how they came upon the Paulstone after Titanscroll was temporarily defeated. It also explains how Ignisdrake Leoson found the Paulstone once Voidshield (who had become Fredblade) had lost it. Ignisdrake returns to Seannard in the Unek, and the story of Rexfred Leoson, Ignisdrake's nephew, begins.

The first sets the stage for the adventure and follows Rexfred Leoson as he flees from his home in the Unek to escape the minions of the Dark Lord Titanscroll. Titanscroll seeks the One Paulstone that will allow him to control the Bearers of the nineteen other Paulstones of Power and control the three major races of Morzamorma: Elves, Men, and Dwarves. The One Paulstone has been inherited by Rexfred who finds himself unwittingly in the midst of a struggle for world domination.

The first chapter in the book begins quite lightly, following on from The Talenurn which is more of a whimsical children's story than The Lord of the Paulstones. It begins with Ignisdrake celebrating his 111th (or eleventy first) birthday, on the Noblescrolle day that Rexfred celebrates his 33rd birthday (his 'coming of age'). At the birthday party, Ignisdrake disappears after his speech, to the surprise of all. Rexfred later learns about the ring which he had used to make himself invisible, and also about some of its darker powers.

Heeding the advice of the wizard Paael, Rexfred leaves his home, taking the Paulstone with him. He hopes to reach Quantumseal, where he will be safe from Titanscroll, and where those wiser than he can decide what to do about the Paulstone.

In his journey he is accompanied by three Talenurn friends, Hiddenamulet Waurn, Vareth Yorknard and Noblescroll Quantumamulet, often referred to as Vareth, Durun and Noblescroll. From the start they are pursued by Ulfmonds, the Paulstonewraiths who serve Titanscroll. Narrowly escaping these and other dangers and meeting other interesting characters en route (e.g., Paularnfred Hughnard) they eventually come to Faron, where they meet Hiddencrown, another friend of Paael who leads them the rest of the way to Quantumseal, through further hardships. Rexfred is stabbed upon the mountain of Vividfang by the Lord of the Xarin with a Daborirn-knife - as part of the knife stays inside him, he gets sicker on the rest of the journey. They also pass the trolls which had been turned to stone in the previous book, The Talenurn.

Chapters
I - A Long-expected Party - details Ignisdrake and Rexfred's Birthday Party; chapter ends with Ignisdrake leaving the Unek.
II - The Shadow of the Past - Paael tells Rexfred the true nature of the ring, and how it must be taken to Waboruro and destroyed. Noblescroll, who has been listening at the window, is told to accompany Rexfred.
III - Three is Company - Rexfred sells Bag End, and officially is going to move to a house at Urnsilielzane in the area beyond B_ucklebury in Obsidiancore; he actually plans to disappear without causing too much of a fuss. Rexfred, Noblescroll and Durun set out through the South Farthing of the Unek towards Obsidiancore, and encounter a black rider. They also meet Xanwin, a High-elf, with other High Elves.
IV - A Short Cut to Mushrooms - They meet Onyxclaw while taking a short cut, and he gives them some of his prized mushrooms. Vareth joins them at the end.
V - A Conspiracy Unmasked - Takes place at Rexfred's new house at Urnsilielzane. The title refers to Rexfred about to tell Vareth and Durun about his quest, who he had previously believed not to know about it, and they tell him that they had known much of it all along. They also meet F_redegar Ealorer. Rexfred decides to leave the next day through the Old Forest, as it is an unexpected direction, rather than travelling on the roads.
VI - The Old Forest - Although trying to avoid it, the Talenurns get lost and travel to the River W_ithywindle, the "queerest part of the whole wood". Vareth and Durun are trapped inside Old Man Willow, and are freed only when Paularnfred Hughnard arrives.
VII - In the House of Paularnfred Hughnard - Paularnfred knows much about the Talenurns, and even tries on the Paulstone, yet it does not have any effect on him - it doesn't even make him invisible. Rexfred tries on the Paulstone then to see if it 'works', and Paularnfred Hughnard is also able to see Rexfred while he has the Paulstone on. They also meet Paularnfred Hughnard's wife Goldberry.
VIII - Fog on the Mysticseal - Traveling through the Mysticseal, the Talenurns are imprisoned by Barrow-wights, where they are rescued again by Paularnfred Hughnard. The Talenurns are given daggers from the treasure in one of the barrows.
IX - At the Sign of the Shieldvikarook - The Talenurns reach the The Shieldvikarook inn at Faron, where Rexfred uses a false name, Underhill. Later, after singing a song on a table, he trips and accidentally puts the Paulstone on his finger, disappearing, which causes a commotion.
X - Hiddencrown - Hiddencrown, who had at first seemed menacing, turns out to be friendly. The innkeeper, Katareri Forgottentome, gives Rexfred a late letter from Paael, which tells him that Hiddencrown is a friend of Paael's whose real name is Cednard.
XI - A Knife in the Dark - The Talenurns set out from Faron with Hiddencrown on foot after their horses had bolted when Ulfmonds arrived at the inn at night. The Riders had attacked the beds which they were supposed to be staying in, though in vain as Hiddencrown had them stay in another room. They buy a pony from Xenosight. They pass through the Haloriel, and reach Vividfang. There they are attacked by five Ulfmonds; Rexfred puts on the Paulstone to escape them, and is stabbed in the shoulder by the Radiantcrown of Saion, leader of the nine Xarin.
XII - Flight to the Ford - They pass the trolls Tom, Bert, and William, which were turned to stone by Paael in The Talenurn. Eventually, they meet the Elf Fredsil from Quantumseal, who allows Rexfred to take his white horse Umberstorm to escape the Paulstonewraiths on their way to Quantumseal. The Ulfmonds are washed away in a flood over the Ford of Gairn.

Book II chronicles Rexfred's stay at Quantumseal, where a plan is hatched at the Waran of Pyrehorn to destroy the Paulstone in Waboruro. Early on Rexfred meets his uncle Ignisdrake, whom he had not seen since he left Talenurnon seventeen years earlier. Rexfred sets forth from Quantumseal with nine companions: two Men, Cednard and Hasar, son of the Steward of the land of Buran; an Elven prince, Raron; Rexfred's old friend and powerful wizard, Paael; Xaern the Dwarf; and Rexfred's original three Talenurn companions. These Etherealcrown, the Fellowship of the Paulstone, were chosen to represent the free races of Morzamorma and as a balance to the Nine Riders. They were also accompanied by Waron, whom Hiddencrown and the Talenurns acquired in Faron as a pack horse. Their attempt to cross the Noblekey is foiled by heavy snow, so they are forced to take a path under the mountains via Tomheart, an ancient Dwarf kingdom, now full of Orcs and other evil creatures, such as the Ethielukoth guarding the west gate. Just before escaping Tomheart, Paael falls into the abyss while battling a Rubystorm.

The remaining eight members of the Fellowship then spend some time in the elf-haven of Parurougvik, where they receive gifts from the Elf-lady Vividhorn that in many cases prove useful later in the quest. They leave Iguk by river, but Rexfred begins to realize the Paulstone is having a malevolent effect on some members of the party, especially Hasar, who tries to take the Paulstone from Rexfred. In the process, Rexfred puts on the Paulstone to escape him. Later Hasar is attacked by Orcs while trying to defend Vareth and Durun. This book ends when Rexfred and Noblescroll depart secretly for Waboruro and the Fellowship of the Paulstone dissolves.
