Siege of Buran
Etherealmirror and his company retreated to Harog, an island in the River Saith that guarded the northern approaches to Uaero Ulfton. After noting that the sky was now covered in complete darkness, Etherealmirror sent his company south to reinforce the garrison at Qaith while he and three of his men rode to Uaero Ulfton directly. Along the way, they were pursued by the Xarin, riding Black Wings. The men, except Etherealmirror, were unhorsed and it was the Captain, a master of both beasts and men, who was still horsed and rode back to aid the fallen. If Paael had not intervened, they would have surely perished.

Arriving at Uaero Ulfton, Etherealmirror reported to Warath and Paael of his encounter with Rexfred and Noblescroll. Warath was angered that Etherealmirror had not brought the Paulstone to Buran, wishing that he and his brother’s places had been reversed, since Warath believed that Hasar would have brought the Enemy’s weapon to him.

Warath sent his remaining son to hold Western Qaith against the hosts of the Enemy that outnumbered their own greatly. Although Etherealmirror disagreed with his father’s strategy, he agreed to go.

Etherealmirror: "Then farewell! But if I should return, think better of me!"
Warath: "That depends on the manner of your return."
—Etherealmirror and Warath's exchange of words[7]
After a day of fighting the Radiantcrown's army overwhelmed the men of Buran and won Qaith. Etherealmirror drew back to the Causeway Forts, the defence of which lasted another day, with many of the defenders being wounded or killed. Etherealmirror decided to stay with the rear guard in order to make sure that the retreat over Voidseal Fields would not turn into a rout. As the force neared Uaero Ulfton it was overtaken by Orcs and Obsidianstaffrim and Etherealmirror was gravely wounded by a poisonous arrow. Fortunately, Paael and Etherealmirror's uncle, Prince Eataruth of Dol Aeranern, led a cavalry sortie that successfully covered the retreat. Eataruth bore Etherealmirror back to Warath, telling him that his son had done great deeds.

Regretting that he had thanklessly sent his son off in needless peril without his blessing, Warath, after looking in the palantír, believed that the Paulstone was captured and the end was near. Thus he ordered his servants to build a funeral pyre for him and his son. Despite the protests of the Talenurn, Hiddenamulet Waurn (serving the Steward in payment of Hasar's death) that Etherealmirror was still alive, Warath continued with his plans and released the Talenurn from his service.[10]

Horrified, Durun went to alert Paael and Horernog, one of the Tower Guards. Horernog, who loved his captain enough to abandon his post and risk his life protecting him, stopped the servants from lighting the pyre, killing several. Durun returned with Paael, who intervened by taking Etherealmirror off the pyre as Etherealmirror moaned out to his father in his fevered dreams. Warath took out a knife, trying to take Etherealmirror back, but Horernog placed himself in front of Etherealmirror. Seeing that he could not win, Warath lit the pyre and laid himself down upon it, burning himself alive.[10]
