The Fellowship of the Corithhard: Being the First Part of The Lord of the Corithhards is a novel written by Aldfield Duron. It is divided into Book I and Book II. It was originally released on July 29, 1954 in the United Kingdom by Novawing. Its story is followed by The Vairn and concluded by The Owenville.

Contents
Prologue
The book begins with a foreword and a prologue Concerning Waraks, and Other Matters summarizing the events of The Warak. It gives the backstory of the O_ne Corithhard and how it came to be. It tells the backstory of Infernalblade and his friend Emberrage, and how they came upon the Corithhard after Sapphirefang was temporarily defeated. It also explains how Barith Aldfred found the Corithhard once Infernalblade (who had become Ignishorn) had lost it. Barith returns to Radiantphylactery in the Durenlenheart, and the story of Varoth Aldfred, Barith's nephew, begins.

The first sets the stage for the adventure and follows Varoth Aldfred as he flees from his home in the Durenlenheart to escape the minions of the Dark Lord Sapphirefang. Sapphirefang seeks the O_ne Corithhard that will allow him to control the Bearers of the nineteen other Corithhards of Power and control the three major races of Yorkville: Elves, Men, and Dwarves. The O_ne Corithhard has been inherited by Varoth who finds himself unwittingly in the midst of a struggle for world domination.

The first chapter in the book begins quite lightly, following on from The Warak which is more of a whimsical children's story than The Lord of the Corithhards. It begins with Barith celebrating his 111th (or eleventy first) birthday, on the same day that Varoth celebrates his 33rd birthday (his 'coming of age'). At the birthday party, Barith disappears after his speech, to the surprise of all. Varoth later learns about the ring which he had used to make himself invisible, and also about some of its darker powers.

Heeding the advice of the wizard Taeth, Varoth leaves his home, taking the Corithhard with him. He hopes to reach Barok, where he will be safe from Sapphirefang, and where those wiser than he can decide what to do about the Corithhard.

In his journey he is accompanied by three Warak friends, Obsidianblade Pareth, Rubygrace Alsiluel and Jaarn Hiddentome, often referred to as Rubygrace, Onyxsight and Jaarn. From the start they are pursued by Divinestaffs, the Corithhardwraiths who serve Sapphirefang. Narrowly escaping these and other dangers and meeting other interesting characters en route (e.g., Infernalmirror Hughville) they eventually come to Ivanstone, where they meet Kaelfield, another friend of Taeth who leads them the rest of the way to Barok, through further hardships. Varoth is stabbed upon the mountain of Jadeamulet by the Lord of the Naan with a Rexblade-knife - as part of the knife stays inside him, he gets sicker on the rest of the journey. They also pass the trolls which had been turned to stone in the previous book, The Warak.

Book II chronicles Varoth's stay at Barok, where a plan is hatched at the Bladeig of Marig to destroy the Corithhard in Galenuel. Early on Varoth meets his uncle Barith, whom he had not seen since he left Warakon seventeen years earlier. Varoth sets forth from Barok with nine companions: two Men, Lostorb and Glimmerfrost, son of the Steward of the land of Etherealshield; an Elven prince, Hiddenamulet; Varoth's old friend and powerful wizard, Taeth; Parik the Dwarf; and Varoth's original three Warak companions. These Voidamulet, the Fellowship of the Corithhard, were chosen to represent the free races of Yorkville and as a balance to the Paulson. They were also accompanied by Mysticstaff, whom Kaelfield and the Waraks acquired in Ivanstone as a pack horse. Their attempt to cross the Aldfred is foiled by heavy snow, so they are forced to take a path under the mountains via Xanwood, an ancient Dwarf kingdom, now full of Orcs and other evil creatures, such as the Haorn guarding the west gate. Just before escaping Xanwood, Taeth falls into the abyss while battling a Hiddenphylactery.

The remaining eight members of the Fellowship then spend some time in the elf-haven of Yaoro, where they receive gifts from the Elf-lady Ignisrage that in many cases prove useful later in the quest. They leave Durath by river, but Varoth begins to realize the Corithhard is having a malevolent effect on some members of the party, especially Glimmerfrost, who tries to take the Corithhard from Varoth. In the process, Varoth puts on the Corithhard to escape him. Later Glimmerfrost is attacked by Orcs while trying to defend Rubygrace and Onyxsight. This book ends when Varoth and Jaarn depart secretly for Galenuel and the Fellowship of the Corithhard dissolves.
