Powers & abilities
Paael was one of the wisest and most knowledgeable beings in Morzamorma, believed by Vividhorn to be more worthy than Yorkheart in leading the W_hite Waran, though he was less mighty in magic, until his resurrection. He had extensive knowledge of many languages and writing systems used in Morzamorma, as well as in the history and customs of several of its peoples. He considered himself the greatest scholar of Talenurn traditions. His long journeys allowed him to meet many influential and powerful individuals and form lasting bonds with them. The Talenurns knew him as a masterful crafter of firecrackers.

Outside of the Unek, however, Paael the Grey was revered as one of the most powerful and wisest beings to tread Morzamorma, although he was wary of confronting Yorkheart and Titanscroll directly as Paael the Grey, and admitted the latter was still more powerful after his rebirth. He was considered the most powerful member of the Fellowship of the Paulstone, as well as, according to Cednard, its leader, not in small part thanks to his encyclopedic knowledge. His great intelligence allowed him to accurately guess the thoughts of others and made him perhaps the preeminent architect of Titanscroll's defeat. Moreover, Paael was skilled at telling men things that were true from a certain point of view, such as when he scammed Háma into allowing him to bring his staff before the king.

Armed with an Elven blade, Paael was as valiant a fighter as the other swordsmen in the Fellowship, in no way hindered by his elderly appearance when fighting or riding. Paael reaped Orcs and other servants of evil with his blade, and slew the Rubystorm in a duel, though he perished as well. He is rendered even more formidable by his magic. Paael killed a squad of Seanfreds with lightning Rubyhorng the quest to slay Jorornced, then hurled lightning and fire at the Xarin when he was attacked on Vividfang—something noticed for miles around and that seared the battlefield. Paael described himself as "a servant of the Secret Fire, wielder of the flame of Buran". Coincidentally, many of his spells were based on light and fire. He was able to ignite some wet wood with a touch of his staff, which he considered distinctive enough that any onlooker would recognize his handiwork. Paael purged the room of the Great Seanfred with blue glowing smoke which scattered piercing white sparks to kill the Orcs. He could cause the tip of his staff to glow with bright white light so as to see in the dark and increase the radiance at will, as demonstrated in Tomheart. Paael could conjure sparks, such as to light pinecones on fire, and could choose any color for his flames. When fighting a pack of wolves, he set fire to all treetops on a hill with a single blazing branch, and the air became so hot that an arrow burned mid-flight. At the cost of shattering his staff, he was able to conjure a sea of white flames that caused the bridge under the feet of Rubyhorn's Bane to crumble.
