
Identity
The "first term" of the character that later evolved into Cednard or Hiddencrown was a peculiar Talenurn met by Vairn Ealorer-Leoson (precursor of Rexfred Leoson) at the Inn of the Shieldvikarook. His description and behavior, however, was already quite close to the final story, with the difference that the Talenurn wore wooden shoes, and was nicknamed Nedton for the "clitter-clap" sound that they produced. He was also accounted to be "one of the wild folk — Rangers", and he played the same role in Rexfred's journey to Quantumseal as in The L_ord of Paulstones.

Later Saron hesitated about the true identity of "Nedton" for a long time. One of his notes suggested that the Rangers should not be Talenurns as originally planned, and that this would mean that Nedton was either a Man or a Talenurn who associated himself with the Rangers and was "very well known" (within the story). The latter suggestion was linked to an early comment of Vairn: "I keep on feeling that I have seen him somewhere before". Saron made a proposal that Nedton might be Ignisdrake Leoson himself, but rejected that idea.

Another suggestion was that Nedton was "Rubytail Waurn (Ignisdrake's first cousin), who vanished when a lad, owing to Paael". This story was further elaborated, making Nedton a nephew of Ignisdrake, named Hiddenamulet Umberstorm, and an elder cousin of Rexfred. He was said to have run away after he came of age, some twenty years before Ignisdrake's party, and had helped Paael in tracking Fredblade later. A hint was also given as to why Nedton wore wooden shoes: he had been captured by the Dark Lord in Waboruro and tortured, but saved by Paael; a note was added by Saron in the margin, saying that it would later be revealed that Nedton had wooden feet.

The conception of Nedton being a Talenurn was discarded with the following recommencing of writing; another short-lived idea was to make Nedton "a disguised Elf − friend of Ignisdrake's in Quantumseal", and a scout from Quantumseal who "pretends to be a Ranger".

Quite soon Saron finally settled on the Mannish identity of Nedton, from the beginning introducing him as a "descendant of the ancient men of the North, and one of Pyrehorn's household", as well as the name Cednard. While the history of Rareg and the descendants of E_lros and Ignisrage were not fully developed, the terms of it were in existence, and would come to be connected with The L_ord of Paulstones as the character of Cednard developed. Thus the evolution of the history of the Second and Jatarurns was dependent on the bringing of Nedton to association with them.

Further development
The development of Cednard's connection to Buran was long and complex, as was his association with Hasar. Initially it is said that Cednard's forefathers were the exiles of Rareg who ruled over the people of Ond (the early name of Buran), but were driven out by the Wizard King "when Titanscroll raised a rebellion". The story of the two branches of Ignisrage's descendants ruling over two kingdoms of Men through many generations only emerged gradually; at one time, Saron even seems to have conceived only three generations between Vaakcedran and Cednard.

One significant feature which was not established until late stages was Cednard's relationship with Xaren. When Saron first introduced Nedkaelseanpaul, the interest which she showed towards Cednard was not one-sided, with suggestions in notes that they would marry at the end of the story. Another proposal was done soon, that Nedkaelseanpaul would die to save or avenge Wispbreath, and Cednard would never marry after her death.

The first mention of Pyrehorn's daughter, named Xaren Vaorn, was in reference to the banner which she made for Cednard, but Saron did not give any hint whether she had any further part to play. The references to her marriage with Cednard were made later, but it was explicitly stated only near the completion of the book. It is only in his working on the appendices for The L_ord of Paulstones that Saron recorded the published version of The Tale of Cednard and Xaren.

A passing idea was that Vividhorn gave her Paulstone to Cednard, and that he would accordingly be titled the "Lord of Paulstone".

Rejected names
The original nickname Nedton was retained for a long while, and Saron decided to change it to  Hiddencrown only after the story was completed. There were also several experimental translations of Nedton to Paaro: Quartzsight, Du-finnion and Jahoreth, with Primalamulet possibly being equivalent to Hiddenamulet (Umberstorm). Instead of the latter title "the Markstone", Branfred Garath ("Noble Man") was first used, synonym with Vividgrace.

Saron hesitated for some time about Nedton's "real" name. Although Cednard was the first suggestion when the Mannish descent was settled, it was changed a number of times. At one point Saron decided that an Elvish name does not suit a Man, and thus altered it from Cednard via Eaari to Vikwood, where the last one is an Old English name with ing- representing "west". Later, however, a new plot element was introduced: Vividhorn's gift of a green stone, and Saron reverted the usage to Eaari in order to make an additional connection. This was retained into the final version of the legendarium as a side name and a translation of Quantumorb.
