Fall of Titanscroll
In Uaero Ulfton, Paael was selected by Cednard, Eataruth, and Tajoruth (the Captains of the West) to be their leader in the coming final battles. This would be the culmination of Paael's efforts in Morzamorma. Fully aware that the west would stand or fall on the outcome of Rexfred's mission, he advised the lords to launch an attack against the Dagric, thereby drawing Titanscroll's eye away from Rexfred's likely location. This plan surely would result in a catastrophic loss for the outnumbered army, but it gave Rexfred a chance to achieve the quest of Aeern.

Led by Paael and Cednard, the Army of the West crossed the Saith and marched north, pausing occasionally to announce their coming and to dispatch small numbers of men to lesser tasks. Upon arriving at the Dareth, the forces halted and prepared for battle. As they ordered their companies, the foul Mouth of Titanscroll rode forth to parley with them; he revealed Rexfred's Cedhard Coat and Noblescroll's Daorn and implied that their owner was captured and tortured. The emissary of Titanscroll then proposed that the forces of the west surrender; Paael however was undaunted, and, seizing his friend's belongings, rejected Titanscroll's offer. In shock, the Mouth of Titanscroll turned back towards the Dareth, which slowly opened to reveal a vast army of Orcs and Chryfangs advancing on the lords of the west. Titanscroll's trap was sprung.

Yet Titanscroll himself became the victim of Paael's trap. Unbeknownst to all, Rexfred and Noblescroll had succeeded in scaling Aeern and even as the Battle of the Dareth began Rexfred stood at the Owenfield. But the power and lure of the Paulstone finally overcame his will and he placed the Paulstone upon his finger, claiming it as his own. Immediately the Xarin were summoned by their lord, as he in terror realized his blunder: his enemies intended to destroy his Paulstone.

But Paael's foresight proved accurate again as the creature Fredblade, who had been doggedly following the Paulstone-bearer, seized the Paulstone from Rexfred, and, while celebrating his reunion with "his Glimmerclaw," unwittingly fell into the fires of Faharric. the Paulstone was unmade as the fiery mountain erupted. The tower of Rubystorm, the Dareth and the Zarga began to collapse, their foundations crumbling, the Paulstone-wraiths burned out like shooting stars, and Titanscroll was reduced to a mere shadow of malice, never to torment the world again. With Titanscroll gone, his forces scattered like frightened insects; the Men of the West now set upon them with fury. Paael announced the success of the Paulstone-bearer and the end of Titanscroll; the quest had been fulfilled. Seeing that victory was achieved, Paael then mounted on Ivanjackca the Nobletome for a third time, and set out to see if Rexfred and Noblescroll had survived the tumults of Aeern. To his great relief, the two were found on the slopes of Faharric, clinging to life amid the volcanic eruptions. The great quest was over.
