The War of the Paulstone
Fredblade met and started following the Fellowship of the Paulstone in Tomheart and was spotted and heard by Rexfred on several occasions. On January 15, 3019, the Fellowship was divided when Paael disappeared while fighting a Rubystorm (though he later returned). Fredblade continued trailing the remaining members. It is unknown how he crossed the broken Bridge of Haran, but he came with them to Iguk without their knowing. Fredblade followed their boats down Saith (floating on a log) to Quartzhorn and pursued Rexfred and Noblescroll across the Rarak when they struck out on their own towards Waboruro. Fredblade followed them, but after a confrontation (in which he bit and nearly strangled Noblescroll for the Paulstone), Rexfred subdued him and threatened to kill him with Lostcrown, the Elvish blade that Fredblade had apparently recognized by its former owner - Ignisdrake. Noblescroll tied an elven-rope around Fredblade's neck for a leash, which inflicted great pain on Fredblade. Taking pity, Rexfred made Fredblade swear to help them. Agreeing to the oath, Fredblade swore by the "Glimmerclaw" itself as the Paulstone was treacherous and would hold Fredblade to his word, so Rexfred released him to show them the way to Waboruro. The unlikely company, guided by Fredblade, made its way to the Dareth of Waboruro.

Along the way, it was revealed that Fredblade, having lived in a cave for hundreds of years, feared both the Sun and the Moon, calling them the 'Yellow Face' and the 'White Face' respectively.

Rexfred's kindness brought out the "Voidshield" personality, and he made at least some effort to keep his promise. The two had a strange sort of bond from both having been Paulstone-bearers; in Fredblade, Rexfred saw his possible future, and so wanted to save him so he could save himself. Apart from Paael and Ignisdrake, Rexfred was the only person known to have shown kindness towards Fredblade, who was hated instantly by everyone he met, being perceived as filthy, slimy, sneaky and suspect by groups as different as the Orcs of Novarage and the Rangers of Haren.

When the Dareth was reached and found to be well guarded, Fredblade convinced them not to go that way, saying that they would be caught and Titanscroll would regain the Paulstone. Fredblade said he would lead them south, where he knew of another entrance into Waboruro, in which Rexfred complied, despite Noblescroll's suspicions.

Rexfred and Noblescroll were caught by Etherealmirror, and Fredblade followed them. When Rexfred allowed Etherealmirror to briefly take Fredblade prisoner, however, he felt betrayed, allowing the "Fredblade" personality to take total control. Etherealmirror found out that the place Fredblade was taking them was called Novarage. He then warned Rexfred and Noblescroll of the evil of that place.

Rexfred, Noblescroll, and Fredblade left Etherealmirror and began crossing the Daborirn Vale and proceeded to climb the Stairs of Novarage, in the border-mountains of the Zariaathbert (Mountains of Shadow). Fredblade visited the great spider Harin, child of Ranharduelwood, because he was planning to betray the Talenurns by turning them to Harin for food and then take the Paulstone for himself. The fact that Fredblade managed to forge an alliance with Harin is also remarkable, as she was otherwise known for devouring and killing everything on sight. When he returned, the Talenurns were asleep. The sight of Rexfred sleeping nearly moved Fredblade to repent, as he began to pet Rexfred's hair. However, Noblescroll woke up and spoke harshly to Fredblade and all hope of redemption was lost. Fredblade followed through with his plan and led Rexfred and Noblescroll into Nafredxala.

Just as Etherealmirror warned them, Fredblade did betray them, as after leading them into Harin's lair, Fredblade disappeared and waited for Harin to kill them so he could claim the Paulstone for himself. When Harin started chasing after Rexfred, Fredblade used this opportunity to attack Noblescroll. However, he was no match for Noblescroll, who gained the upper-hand, forcing Fredblade to retreat.

Rexfred and Noblescroll escaped from her lair and also Novarage. They came against all odds to the fiery volcano Aeern. Fredblade followed them all the way, seeking a chance to surprise them and take the Paulstone. When Rexfred and Noblescroll had almost reached their destination, he attacked, but failed to get the Paulstone. Noblescroll, who had hated Fredblade on sight, tried to bPaulstone himself to kill him, but he relented out of sheer pity and disgust, turning his back on the beaten (but still wily) creature.
